<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2">The Patient: Consumer of Nursing and Health Care</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The term <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;patient:&lt;/b&gt; a traditional term used to identify someone who is a recipient of health care">patient</button></strong>, derived from a Latin verb meaning &#x201C;to suffer,&#x201D; has traditionally been used to describe a person who is a recipient of care. The connotation commonly attached to the word is one of dependence. For this reason, many nurses prefer to use the term <em>client,</em> which is derived from a Latin verb meaning &#x201C;to lean,&#x201D; connoting alliance and interdependence. The term <em>patient</em> is used purposely throughout this book; it is most commonly used by clinicians, as evidenced by its usage by the Interprofessional Education Collaborative (IPEC, 2016a), whose members include 15 national associations of schools of the health professions, including nursing, allopathic medicine, osteopathic medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, and public health, to name a few (see later discussion of IPEC).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient who seeks care for a health problem or problems (increasing numbers of people have multiple health problems or comorbidities) is also an individual person, a member of a family, a member of various social groups, and a citizen of the community. Patients&#x2019; needs vary depending on problems, associated circumstances, and past experiences. Many patients, who as consumers of health care have become more knowledgeable about health care options, expect a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page6" title="6"></span>collaborative approach with the nurse in the quest for optimal health (<a href="c01-sec05.xhtml#bib91">Majid &#x0026; Gagliardi, 2019</a>). Among the nurse&#x2019;s important functions in health care delivery are identifying the patient&#x2019;s immediate, ongoing, and long-term needs and working together with the patient to address them.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3">The Patient&#x2019;s Basic Needs: Maslow Hierarchy of Needs</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Certain needs are basic to all people. Some of these needs are more important than others. Once an essential need is met, people often experience a need on a higher level of priority. Addressing needs by priority reflects Maslow&#x2019;s Hierarchy of Needs (<a href="c01-sec03.xhtml#ff1-1">Fig.&#x00A0;1-1</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Maslow ranked human needs to include physiologic needs, safety and security, sense of belonging and affection, esteem and self-respect, and self-actualization. Self-actualization includes self-fulfillment, desire to know and understand, and aesthetic needs. Lower-level needs always remain; however, a person&#x2019;s ability to pursue higher-level needs indicates movement toward psychological health and well-being (<a href="c01-sec05.xhtml#bib17">Maslow, 1954</a>). Such a hierarchy of needs is a useful framework that can be applied to many nursing models for assessment of a patient&#x2019;s strengths, limitations, and need for nursing interventions.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>