<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s117">Disability</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="s118">Definitions of Disability</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A person is considered to have a <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;disability:&lt;/b&gt; restriction or lack of ability to perform an activity in a normal manner; the consequences of impairment in terms of a person&#x2019;s functional performance and activity&#x2014;disability represents impairment at the level of the person (e.g., bathing, dressing, communication, walking, grooming)">disability</button></strong> (limitation in performance or function in everyday activities) if they have difficulty talking, hearing, seeing, walking, climbing stairs, lifting or carrying objects, performing activities of daily living (ADLs), such as feeding oneself, bathing, dressing, grooming, toileting, doing school work, or working at a job. A severe <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page142" title="142"></span>disability is present if a person is unable to perform one or more activities, uses an assistive device for mobility, or needs help from another person to accomplish basic activities. People are also considered severely disabled if they receive federal benefits because of an inability to work.</p>
<p class="indent">According to the World Health Organization (WHO, 2018a), <em>disability</em> is the interaction between individuals with a health condition (e.g., cerebral palsy, spinal cord injury, Down syndrome) personal and environmental factors (e.g., negative attitudes on the part of society, inaccessible transportation and public buildings, and limited social supports). In 2001, WHO developed the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), which defined disability as an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations, participation restrictions, and environmental factors.</p>
<p class="indent">The term <em>impairment</em> describes a loss or abnormality in body structure or physiologic function, including mental function. The term <em>societal participation</em> is used in the WHO classification system in place of <em>handicap</em> to acknowledge the fact that the environment is always interacting with people to either assist or hinder participation in life activities. The environment may have a greater impact on a person&#x2019;s ability to participate in life activities than do physical, mental, or emotional factors or conditions (WHO, 2018a).</p>
<p class="indent">In the United States, federal legislation uses multiple definitions of disability, which makes common understanding of disability difficult. The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA; discussed later in this chapter) defines a person with a disability as one who (1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, (2) has a record of such an impairment, or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment. Other phrases used to describe people with disabilities that are not universally accepted, understood or recommended are &#x201C;people who are physically challenged&#x201D; and &#x201C;people with special needs.&#x201D;</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s119">Prevalence of Disability</h5>
<p class="nonindent">According to the WHO (2018a), over one billion people, or about 15% of the global population, have some type of disability. Between 110 and 190 million adults worldwide have significant difficulties in function due to disability. The number of people with disabilities is increasing and is expected to continue to climb as people with early-onset disability, chronic disorders, and severe trauma survive. People with disability comprise the world&#x2019;s largest minority (United Nations, n.d.).</p>
<p class="indent">The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2017) reported that in 2016, one in four noninstitutionalized adults, or 61 million adults in the United States, had a disability that negatively affected major life activities. This reflects an increase from 2013 in which one in five noninstitutionalized adults in the United States had a disability (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib492">Okoro, Hollis, Cyrus, et al., 2018</a>). The estimate is likely low as these figures do not include people who are living in institutions or are active duty military personnel.</p>
<p class="indent">The last U.S. Census indicated that more than 46% of people with one disability have other disabilities. Although the prevalence of disability is higher in men than in women for people younger than 65 years, the prevalence is higher in women than in men for people older than 65 years (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018a). In the United States, the prevalence of disability is higher among American Indians as well as Alaska Natives, adults with incomes below the federal poverty level, and people living in the southwestern U.S. census region (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib536">Okoro et al., 2018</a>). In addition, the prevalence of disability in the United States is higher for African Americans and Whites than for Hispanics and Asians (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Globally, more than 80% of the one billion people worldwide with disability live in low- and middle-income countries, in which all people have limited access to basic health care and social services. However, limited access to basic health care and support services has a more profound effect on those with disability.</p>
<p class="indent">The proportion of individuals with disability employed in 2018 was 19.1%. In contrast, 65.9% of those without disability were employed. About 8 in 10 people with a disability were not in the labor force in 2018, compared to about 3 in 10 of those with no disability. Individuals with disability are more likely to be employed part time than those with no disability. These discrepancies exist across all educational attainment groups (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). A consequence of lack of employment or only part-time employment is that those with a disability earn less money than people without disabilities. Low income along with limited access to basic health care and support services has a profound effect on those with disability. In 2017, the poverty rate of those individuals of working age, generally considered 18 to 64 years, with disability was 29.6%. In contrast, the poverty rate in 2017 of those without disability was 13.2% (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib536">Houtenville &#x0026; Boege, 2019</a>). See <a href="#ct7-1">Chart&#x00A0;7-1</a> for a summary of additional facts about people with disabilities.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s120">Characteristics of Disability</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The characteristics of disability include an understanding of the categories, types, and models of disability. Additional characteristics include understanding the broad concept of disability.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Categories and Types of Disability</h6>
<p class="nonindent">There are many categories and types of disabilities that include cognitive, developmental, intellectual, sensory, acquired, psychiatric, and physical. A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;cognitive disability:&lt;/b&gt; limitations in mental functioning and difficulties with communication, self-care, and social skills">cognitive disability</button></strong> is defined as limitations in mental functioning and difficulties with communication, self-care, and difficulty with social skills.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong>Developmental disabilities</strong> are those that occur any time from birth to 22 years of age and result in impairment of physical or mental health, cognition, speech, language, or self-care. This is an umbrella term that includes intellectual disabilities but can be a physical disability only. Examples of developmental disabilities include spina bifida, cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, muscular dystrophy, dwarfism, and osteogenesis imperfecta. Some developmental disabilities occur as a result of birth trauma or severe illness or injury at a very young age, whereas many developmental disabilities are genetic in origin (see <a href="c06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>). Some developmental disabilities overlap with cognitive and/or intellectual disabilities that affect intellectual functioning and adaptive behavior. An <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;intellectual disability:&lt;/b&gt; a disability that occurs before 18 years of age characterized by significant limitations in both intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior, which includes many everyday social and practical skills">intellectual disability</button></strong> occurs before 18 years of age and is characterized by significant limitations in both intellectual functioning as well as in adaptive behavior, including <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page143" title="143"></span>many everyday social and practical skills. Because individuals with developmental and intellectual disabilities are living well into adulthood and aging with a disability, all nurses and other health care providers will encounter them in practice and must be knowledgeable and prepared to provide high quality health care.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct7-1"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;7-1</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Summary of Facts About People with Disability</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Approximately 61 million people in the United States have a disability, or one in every four people.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The prevalence of disabilities in adults is approximately 10% of people 18&#x2013;64 years of age and 38% of adults 65 years of age and older.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The prevalence of disabilities varies by state and by gender, with higher prevalence in the South and among females.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>More than 11 million people with disabilities require personal assistance with everyday activities (e.g., getting around inside the home, bathing or showering, preparing meals, and performing light housework).</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Approximately 3.3 million people use a wheelchair; another 10 million use a walking aid such as cane, crutches, or walker.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>More than 1.8 million people report being unable to see printed words because of vision impairment, 1 million are unable to hear conversations because of hearing impairment, and 2.5 million have difficulty with their speech being understood.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>More than 16 million people have limitations in cognitive function or have a mental or emotional illness that interferes with daily activities, including those with Alzheimer&#x2019;s disease and intellectual disabilities.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Self-reported health status among adults with disabilities differs from that of people without disabilities, with fewer people with disabilities describing their health as excellent or good.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The percentage of people with disabilities who are employed ranges from 17.8% to 23.4%; of those without disabilities, the percent ranges from 63.5% to 66.2%.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Among all age groups, people with a disability are much less likely to be employed than those without a disability. People with a disability who work are more likely than those without disability to work part time. People with a disability who were not in the labor force (neither employed nor unemployed) are about 8 in 10, compared with about 3 in 10 of those without a disability.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Many people with disabilities would like to work but are hampered in doing so by limited access, lack of accommodations in the workplace, lack of transportation, and reluctance of employers to hire them.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The percentage of people with disabilities below the poverty level is more than twice that of people without disabilities.</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Center for Health Statistics. (2017). Disability and functioning (noninstitutionalized adults aged 18 and over). Retrieved on 7/15/2019 at: <a href="http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/disability.htm">www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/disability.htm</a>; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2018). Disability and health. Common barriers to participation experienced by people with disabilities. Retrieved on 7/16/2019 at: <a href="http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/disability-barriers.html">www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/disability-barriers.html</a>; Lauer, E. A., &#x0026; Houtenville, A. J. (2018). Estimates of prevalence, demographic characteristics and social factors among people with disabilities in the USA: A cross-survey comparison. <em>BMJ Open, 8</em>, e017828; Na, L., Hennessy, S., Boner, H. R., et al. (2017). Disability stage and receipt of recommended care among elderly Medicare beneficiaries. <em>Disability &#x0026; Health Journal, 10</em>(1), 48&#x2013;57; U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Persons with a disability: Labor force characteristics&#x2014;2018. Retrieved on 7/5/2019 at: <a href="http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/disabl.pdf">www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/disabl.pdf</a>; United Nations. (n.d.). Factsheet on persons with disabilities. Retrieved on 7/20/2019 at: <a href="http://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/resources/factsheet-on-persons-with-disabilities.html">www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/resources/factsheet-on-persons-with-disabilities.html</a></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">A sensory disability is characterized by impairment of the sense of sight, hearing, smell, touch, and/or taste. Sensory disabilities most commonly affect hearing or vision; however, they also include learning disabilities that affect the ability to learn, remember, or concentrate; disabilities that affect the ability to speak or communicate; and disabilities that affect the ability to work, shop, and care for oneself, or access health care<em>.</em> Risks associated with sensory disabilities include isolation, reduced cognitive function, poor physical and psychological health, and increased risk of falls and hospitalization (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib536">McKee, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Psychiatric disability is defined as a mental illness or impairment that substantially limits one&#x2019;s ability to complete major life activities, such as learning, working, and communicating (WHO, 2018b). Although psychiatric disability and mental health disorders are not the focus of this chapter, it is important to note that a person may have more than one type of disability at the same time, requiring health care providers to be prepared to care for patients with several types of disabilities.</p>
<p class="indent">Whether a disability is cognitive, developmental, intellectual, physical, or sensory it may also be characterized as acquired. Acquired disabilities may occur as a result of an acute and sudden injury (e.g., traumatic brain injury [TBI]; spinal cord injury; and traumatic amputation due to traffic crashes, falls, burns, or acts of violence such as intimate partner violence and war and military conflicts), acute nontraumatic disorders (e.g., stroke, myocardial infarction), or progression of a chronic disorder (e.g., arthritis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson&#x2019;s disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease, blindness due to diabetic retinopathy).</p>
<p class="indent">Many disabilities are visible; however, invisible disabilities are often as disabling as those that can be seen. Some disabilities affect only instrumental activities of living (IADLs), such as shopping for food, doing laundry, housekeeping, and handling financial matters. Other disabilities affect ADLs only. People can be temporarily disabled because of an injury or acute exacerbation of a chronic disorder but later return to full functioning.</p>
<p class="indent">A common challenge for people with disability is the need to hire and oversee caregivers who come into their homes to assist with ADLs and IADLs. For many, it is difficult to be in a position of hiring, supervising, and sometimes firing people who may provide them with intimate physical care. The need to balance the roles of receiving care and overseeing the person providing that care may lead to blurring of role boundaries.</p>
<p class="indent">Many people with disabilities are at risk for <strong>secondary health conditions</strong> (e.g., pressure injuries, urinary tract infections, low bone density, depression) because of a narrow margin of health. Many of these conditions are predictable and with treatment are preventable with appropriate assessment for risk, prevention and treatment strategies (WHO, 2018a). Some conditions can be both primary and secondary <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page144" title="144"></span>conditions depending on circumstances. For example, a mobility disability could lead to social isolation and absence of participation in activities. This in turn could lead to depression as a secondary condition (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib536">Krahn, 2019</a>). Comorbidities (e.g., cardiac disease, cancer, hearing loss) are not due to disability and thus can occur in those with or without disability.</p>
<p class="indent">Although different impairments may result from different types of disabilities, there are some similarities across disabilities. People with disabilities are often considered by society to be dependent and needing to be cared for by others; however, many people with disabilities are highly functioning, independent, productive people who are capable of caring for themselves and others, having children and raising families, holding full-time jobs, and making significant and major contributions to society. Like other people, most individuals with disabilities prefer to live in their own homes with family members. Most of them are able to live at home independently. Some individuals with disabilities live alone in their own homes and use home care services. However, alternative living arrangements may be necessary; these include assisted living facilities, long-term care facilities, and group homes.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct7-2"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;7-2</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Models of Disability</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Medical Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Medical Model equates people who are disabled with their disabilities and views disability as a problem of the person, directly caused by disease, trauma, or other health condition, that requires medical care provided in the form of individual treatment by professionals. Health care providers, rather than people with disabilities, are viewed as the experts or authorities. Management of the disability is aimed at cure or the person&#x2019;s adjustment and behavior change. The model is viewed as promoting passivity and dependency. People with disabilities are viewed as tragic.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Rehabilitation Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Rehabilitation Model emerged from the medical model. It regards disability as a deficiency that requires a rehabilitation specialist or other helping professional to fix the problem. People with disabilities are often perceived as having failed if they do not overcome the disability.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Social Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Social Model, which is also referred to as the barriers or disability model, views disability as socially constructed and as a political issue that is a result of social and physical barriers in the environment. Its perspective is that disability can be overcome by removal of these barriers.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Biopsychosocial Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Biopsychosocial Model integrates the medical and social models to address perspectives of health from a biologic, individual, and social perspective. Critiques of this model have suggested that the disabling condition, rather than the person and the experience of the person with a disability, remains the defining construct of the Biopsychosocial Model.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Functional Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Functional Model is driven by the World Health Organization&#x2019;s <em>International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health</em> (<em>ICF</em>). Disability is considered an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations, participation restrictions, and their interaction with environmental factors. The ICF addresses components of health rather than consequence of disease.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Interface Model</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">The Interface Model is based on the life experience of the person with a disability and views disability at the intersection (i.e., interface) of the medical diagnosis of a disability and environmental barriers. It considers rather than ignores the diagnosis. The person with a disability, rather than others, defines the problems and seeks or directs solutions.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Other Models of Disability</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">Other models include the Identity Model (views disability as a positive rather than negative identity), the Human Rights Model (emphasizes the human dignity of individuals with disability and policy change), the Cultural Model (focuses on different views of disability within the context of a specific culture), the Charity Model (encourages humane treatment of people with disabilities, but views people with disabilities as victims of their impairment), and the Economic Model (approaches disability from the perspective of the ability of people with disabilities to work and contribute to society). Each of these models introduces elements that affect how individuals with disability are perceived and, as a result, how they are treated. Therefore, the underlying views and implications suggested by each model need to be examined and critiqued. Importantly, an analysis of these models helps promote introspection and discussion of the concept of disability.</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Drum, C. F. (2014). The dynamics of disability and chronic conditions. <em>Disability and Health Journal, 7</em>(1), 2&#x2013;5; Goodall, C. J. (1995). Is disability any business of nurse education? <em>Nurse Education Today, 15</em>(5), 323&#x2013;327; Retief, M., &#x0026; Lets&#x030C;osa, R. (2018). Models of disability: A brief overview. <em>HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies, 74</em>(1), a4738; Smeltzer, S. C. (2007). Improving the health and wellness of persons with disabilities: A call to action too important for nursing to ignore. <em>Nursing Outlook, 55</em>(4), 189&#x2013;193; Smeltzer, S. C. (2021). <em>Delivering quality healthcare for people with disability</em>. Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau International. World Health Organization. (2001). <em>International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health&#x2014;ICF</em>. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.</p>
</div>
<h6 class="h6">Models of Disability</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Several models of disability have been used to address or explain the issues encountered by people with disabilities. <a href="#ct7-2">Chart&#x00A0;7-2</a> describes several models of disability. The Interface Model (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib464">Goodall, 1995</a>), developed by a nurse, promotes care designed to be empowering rather than care that promotes dependency. It takes into account the disabling condition and its disabling effects. Furthermore, it promotes the view that people with disabilities are capable, responsible people who are able to function effectively despite having a disability. The Interface Model can serve as a basis for the role of nurses as advocates for the removal of barriers to health care and for the examination of how society and health care professionals contribute to discrimination by viewing disability as an abnormal state. Several other models of disability exist and serve as a guide for reflection on what disability means as well as its antecedents and outcomes (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib495">Retief &#x0026; Lets&#x030C;osa, 2018</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Disability versus Disabling Disorders</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Regardless of which definition or model of disability is adopted, it is important to realize that one can understand <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page145" title="145"></span>xthe pathophysiology and physical changes related to a disabling condition or injury without understanding the concept of disability. The nurse caring for patients with preexisting disabilities or new disabilities must recognize the impact of a disability on patients&#x2019; well-being and their current and future health, their ability to participate in self-care or self-management, and their ability to obtain required health care and recommended health screening. Nursing management&#x2014;from assessment through evaluation of the effectiveness of nursing interventions&#x2014;must be monitored frequently to ensure that appropriate modifications have been made so that people with disabilities can receive health care equal to that of people without disabilities. Furthermore, nurses as well as other health care providers need to examine their facilities and procedures to ensure that the needs of people with various disabilities can be adequately addressed. Although the health care needs of people with disabilities generally do not differ from those of the general population, some disabilities create special needs and necessitate the use of special accommodations. <a href="#ct7-3">Chart&#x00A0;7-3</a> reviews questions to ask to ensure quality health care for people with disabilities.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 145</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page146" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="146">p. 146</span></div>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct7-3"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;7-3</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Questions to Ask to Ensure Quality Health Care for People with Disability</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Communication Strategies</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the patient with a disability require or prefer accommodations (e.g., a sign language interpreter) to ensure full participation in conversations about their health care?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are appropriate accommodations made to communicate with the patient?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are efforts made to direct all conversations to the patient rather than to others who have accompanied the patient to the health care facility?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is appropriate language (people-first language) used in referring to the patient?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Accessibility of the Health Care Facility</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are clinics, hospital rooms, offices, restrooms, laboratories, and imaging facilities accessible to people with disabilities, as legally required by the Americans With Disabilities Act and Rehabilitation Act?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Has accessibility been verified by a person with a disability?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is a sign language interpreter other than a family member available to assist in obtaining a patient&#x2019;s health history and in conducting a physical assessment?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the facility include appropriate equipment to permit people with disabilities to obtain health care (including mammography, gynecologic examination and care, dental care) in a dignified and safe manner?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;assessment:&lt;/b&gt; the systematic collection of data, through interview, observation, and examination, to determine the patient&#x2019;s health status and any actual or potential problems">Assessment</button></strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Usual Health Considerations</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the health history address the same issues that would be included when obtaining a history from a person without disabilities, including recent preventive health screening, sexuality, sexual function, and reproductive health issues?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Disability-Related Considerations</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the health history address the patient&#x2019;s specific disability and the effect of disability on the patient&#x2019;s ability to obtain health care, manage self-care activities, and obtain preventive health screening and follow-up care?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>What physical modifications and positioning are needed to ensure a thorough physical examination, including pelvic or testicular and rectal examination?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Abuse</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the increased risk for abuse (physical, emotional, financial, and sexual) by various people (family, paid care providers, strangers) addressed in the assessment?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>If abuse is detected, are men and women with disability who are survivors of abuse directed to appropriate resources, including accessible shelters and hotlines?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Depression</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the patient experiencing depression? If so, is treatment offered just as it would be to a patient without a disability, without assuming that depression is normal and a result of having a disability?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Aging</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>What concerns does the patient have about aging with a preexisting disability?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>What effect has aging had on the patient&#x2019;s disability, and what effect has the disability had on the patient&#x2019;s aging?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Secondary Health Conditions</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the patient have secondary health conditions related to their disability or its treatment?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the patient at risk for secondary health conditions because of environmental barriers or lack of access to health care or health promotion activities?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are strategies in place to reduce the risk for secondary health conditions or to treat existing secondary health conditions?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH2">Accommodations in the Home</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>What accommodations does the patient have at home to encourage or permit self-care?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>What additional accommodations does the patient need at home to encourage or permit self-care?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Cognitive Status</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is it assumed that the patient is able to participate in discussion and conversation rather than assuming that they are unable to do so because of a disability?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are appropriate modifications made in written and verbal communication strategies?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Modifications in Nursing Care</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are modifications made during hospital stays, acute illness or injury, and other health care encounters to enable a patient with disability to be as independent as they prefer?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is &#x201C;people-first language&#x201D; used in referring to a patient with disability, and do nurses and other staff talk directly to the patient rather than to those who accompanied the patient?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are all staff informed about the activities of daily living for which the patient will require assistance?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are accommodations made to enable the patient to use his or her assistive devices (hearing/visual aids, prostheses, limb support devices, ventilators, service animals)?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>If a patient with disability is immobilized because of surgery, illness, injury, or treatments, are risks of immobility addressed and strategies implemented to minimize those risks?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the patient with a disability assessed for other illnesses and health issues (e.g., other acute or chronic illness, depression, psychiatric-mental health, cognitive disorders) not related to the primary disability?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Patient Education</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are accommodations and alternative formats of instructional materials (large print, Braille, visual materials, audiotapes) provided for patients with disabilities?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does patient instruction address the modifications (e.g., use of assistive devices) needed by patients with disabilities to enable them to adhere to recommendations?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are modifications made in educational strategies to address learning needs, cognitive changes, and communication impairment?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Health Promotion and Disease Prevention</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are health promotion strategies discussed with people with disabilities along with their potential benefits: improving quality of life and preventing secondary health conditions (health problems that result because of preexisting disability)?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are patients aware of accessible community-based facilities (e.g., health care facilities, imaging centers, public exercise settings, transportation) to enable them to participate in health promotion?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Independence versus Dependence</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is independence, rather than dependence, of the patient with a disability the focus of nursing care and interaction?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Are care and interaction with the patient focused on empowerment rather than promoting dependence of the patient?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the patient aware of available resources and supports and do they know how to access them?</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Insurance Coverage</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Does the patient have access to the health insurance coverage and other services for which they qualify?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Is the patient aware of various insurance and other available programs?</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Would the patient benefit from talking to a social worker about eligibility for Medicaid, Medicare, disability insurance, and other services?</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s121">Federal Legislation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because of widespread discrimination against people with disabilities, the U.S. Congress has enacted legislation to address health care disparities in this population. This legislation includes the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the ADA. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 protects people from discrimination based on their disability. This act applies to employers and organizations that receive financial assistance from any federal department or agency, including many hospitals, long-term care facilities, mental health centers, and human service programs. It forbids organizations from excluding or denying people with disabilities equal access to program benefits and services. It also prohibits discrimination related to availability, accessibility, and delivery of services, including health care services.</p>
<p class="indent">The ADA, implemented in 1990, mandates that people with disabilities have access to job opportunities and to the community without discrimination based on having a disability. The ADA also requires that &#x201C;reasonable accommodations&#x201D; be provided for transportation and to facilitate employment of a person with a disability. Examples of reasonable accommodations in health care settings include accessible facilities and equipment (e.g., accessible restrooms, adjustable examination tables, access ramps, grab bars, elevated toilet seats) and alternative communication methods (e.g., telecommunication devices and sign language interpreters for use by people who are deaf). Failure to make reasonable accommodations can result in poor care for patients with disabilities. For example, lack of accommodation for people who have hearing loss or are deaf can lead to failed communication and inadequate sharing of important information between them and their health care providers (<a href="c07-sec06.xhtml#bib536">McKee, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Although the ADA took effect in 1992, compliance has been slow, and some facilities continue to be inaccessible although all new construction and modifications of public facilities must address access for people with disabilities. Because some courts previously interpreted the definition of disability in the ADA so narrowly that few people could meet it, the ADA Amendments Act was signed into law in 2008 and enacted in January 2009 (U.S. Department of Justice, 2009). The act broadly defines <em>disability</em> to encompass impairments that substantially limit a major life activity. This wording states that effective use of assistive devices, auxiliary aids, accommodations, medical therapies, and supplies (other than eyeglasses and contact lenses) does not alter the determination of whether a disability qualifies under the law. The purpose of these amendments was to cover more people and to shift the attention from focusing on who has a disability to making accommodations and avoiding discrimination.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>