<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s307">Mixed Acid&#x2013;Base Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Patients can simultaneously experience two or more independent acid&#x2013;base disorders. A normal pH in the presence <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page264" title="264"></span>of changes in the PaCO<sub>2</sub> and plasma HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup> concentration immediately suggests a mixed disorder. An example of a mixed disorder is the simultaneous occurrence of metabolic acidosis due to lactic acid accumulation and respiratory acidosis due to hypoventilation. Both of these disorders result in excessive acid accumulation in the bloodstream due to respiratory failure and cardiac arrest (Emmett &#x0026; Palmer, 2018b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s308">Compensation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Generally, the pulmonary and renal systems compensate for each other to return the pH to normal. In a single acid&#x2013;base disorder, the system not causing the problem tries to compensate by returning the ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid to the normal 20:1. The lungs compensate for metabolic disturbances by changing CO<sub>2</sub> excretion; hypoventilation accumulates CO<sub>2</sub>, hyperventilation causes loss of CO<sub>2</sub>. The kidneys compensate for respiratory disturbances by altering bicarbonate reabsorption and H<sup>+</sup> secretion (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>; <a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Theodore, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">In respiratory acidosis, excess hydrogen in the blood is excreted in the urine in exchange for bicarbonate ions which are conserved. In respiratory alkalosis, the renal excretion of bicarbonate increases, and hydrogen ions are retained. In metabolic acidosis, the lungs compensate by increasing the ventilation rate and the kidneys retain bicarbonate. In metabolic alkalosis, the respiratory system compensates by decreasing ventilation to conserve CO<sub>2</sub> and increase the PaCO<sub>2,</sub> which in turn increases carbonic acid. Because the lungs respond to acid&#x2013;base disorders within minutes, compensation for metabolic imbalances occurs faster than renal compensation for respiratory imbalances (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>; <a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Theodore, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent"><a href="c10-sec12.xhtml#tt10-13">Table&#x00A0;10-13</a> summarizes compensation effects.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s309">Blood Gas Analysis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Blood gas analysis is often used to identify the specific acid&#x2013;base disturbance and the degree of compensation that has occurred. The analysis is usually based on an arterial blood sample; however, if an arterial sample cannot be obtained, a mixed venous sample may be used (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Theodore, 2019</a>). Results of ABG analysis provide information about alveolar ventilation, oxygenation, and acid&#x2013;base balance. It is necessary to evaluate the concentrations of serum electrolytes (e.g., sodium, potassium, chloride) along with ABG data because electrolytes are commonly affected by acid&#x2013;base imbalances. The health history, physical examination, previous blood gas results, and serum electrolytes should always be part of the assessment used to determine the cause of the acid&#x2013;base disorder (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Larkin &#x0026; Zimmanck, 2015</a>). Responding to isolated sets of blood gas results without these data can lead to serious errors in interpretation. Treatment of the underlying condition usually corrects acid&#x2013;base disorders (<a href="c10-sec19.xhtml#ct10-3">Chart&#x00A0;10-3</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>