<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s260">Phosphorus Imbalances</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Phosphorus (HPO<sub>4</sub><sup>&#x2212;</sup>) is a critical constituent of all body tissues and is plentiful in the average diet of people living in developed countries. Intake of phosphorus usually exceeds body requirements and the kidney excretes the excess. Phosphorus is essential to the function of muscle and RBCs; the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, which facilitates the release of oxygen from hemoglobin; and the maintenance of acid&#x2013;base balance, as well as the nervous system and the intermediary metabolism of carbohydrate, protein, and fat. It is a major component of the cell structure, phospholipids, nucleotides, and nucleic acids (DNA and RNA). It provides structural support to bones and teeth. Phosphorus is the primary anion of the ICF and requires active transport mechanisms to maintain its presence inside the cells. Most intracellular phosphorus is bound to proteins and lipids. About 85% of phosphorus is located in bones and teeth, 14% in soft tissue, and less than 1% in the ECF (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt10-10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;10-10</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Phosphorus Imbalances</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Imbalance</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Contributing Factors</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Signs/Symptoms</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Phosphorus deficit (hypophosphatemia)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Serum phosphorus &#x003C;2.7 mg/dL</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Refeeding after starvation, alcohol withdrawal, diabetic ketoacidosis, respiratory and metabolic alkalosis, &#x2193; magnesium, &#x2193; potassium, hyperparathyroidism, vomiting, diarrhea, hyperventilation, vitamin D deficiency associated with malabsorptive disorders, burns, acid&#x2013;base disorders, parenteral nutrition, and diuretic and antacid use</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Paresthesias, muscle weakness, bone pain and tenderness, chest pain, confusion, cardiomyopathy, respiratory failure, seizures, tissue hypoxia, and increased susceptibility to infection, nystagmus</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Phosphorus excess (hyperphosphatemia)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Serum phosphorus &#x003E;4.5 mg/dL</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease, excessive intake of phosphorus, vitamin D excess, respiratory and metabolic acidosis, hypoparathyroidism, volume depletion, leukemia/lymphoma treated with cytotoxic agents, increased tissue breakdown, rhabdomyolysis</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Tetany, tachycardia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, muscle weakness, signs and symptoms of hypocalcemia; hyperactive reflexes; soft tissue calcifications in lungs, heart, kidneys, and cornea</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">&#x2193;, decreased.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Norris, T. L. (2019). <em>Porth&#x2019;s pathophysiology: Concepts of altered health state</em> (10th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">The normal serum phosphorus level is 2.7 to 4.5 mg/dL (0.87 to 1.45 mmol/L) in adults (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Fischbach &#x0026; Fischbach, 2018</a>). Phosphorus homeostasis is maintained through absorption and secretion in the GI tract, filtration and absorption in the kidneys, and shifts into and out of bone. PTH and vitamin D assist in phosphate homeostasis by varying phosphate reabsorption in the proximal tubule of the kidney. PTH allows the shift of phosphate from bone to plasma. Phosphorus deficit and phosphorus excess are less common electrolyte imbalances (<a href="#tt10-10">Table&#x00A0;10-10</a>).</p>
<h3 class="superMheadpH2" id="s261">Phosphorus Deficit (Hypophosphatemia)</h3>
<p class="nonindent">Hypophosphatemia is indicated by a value below 2.7 mg/dL (0.87 mmol/L). Although it often indicates phosphorus deficiency, hypophosphatemia may occur under a variety of circumstances in which total-body phosphorus stores are normal. Phosphorus deficiency can also occur as an abnormally low content of phosphorus in lean tissues without evidence of low phosphate in the bloodstream. Hypophosphatemia can be due to lack of sufficient intake, excess excretion (renal phosphate wasting), shift of phosphorus from extracellular to intracellular spaces, or by decreased intestinal absorption of phosphorus (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s262">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hypophosphatemia rarely occurs due to inadequate intake, as there are many dietary sources of phosphate (e.g., meats, dairy products, beans). However, phosphate can become depleted in GI malabsorption disorders such as chronic diarrhea, Crohn&#x2019;s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page255" title="255"></span>disease, or celiac disease. Hypophosphatemia can also occur in anorexia, bulimia, and alcoholism. Vitamin D deficit can cause low phosphate levels in the bloodstream. Vitamin D regulates intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate ion; therefore, a deficiency of vitamin D can cause both decreased calcium and phosphorus levels. These deficiencies can lead to osteomalacia (softened and brittle bones) in the adult (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Hypophosphatemia can occur if there is high intake of antacids&#x2014;particularly those containing calcium, magnesium, or aluminum. Excess phosphorus binding by antacids may decrease the phosphorus available from the diet to an amount lower than required to maintain serum phosphorus balance. The degree of hypophosphatemia depends on the amount of phosphorus in the diet compared to the dose of antacid (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Hypophosphatemia can also occur during the administration of calories to patients who have had severe protein&#x2013;calorie malnutrition. This syndrome can be induced in any person with severe malnutrition (e.g., patients with anorexia nervosa or alcoholism, older patients who are debilitated and unable to eat). Feeding a patient who is nutritionally deprived stimulates a large insulin release that can cause shift of phosphate from the extracellular to the intracellular compartment. Also, marked hypophosphatemia can develop in patients who are malnourished who receive parenteral nutrition that does not contain sufficient phosphorus (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib750">Aubry, Friedli, Schetz, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Other causes of hypophosphatemia include heatstroke, prolonged intense hyperventilation, alcohol withdrawal, DKA, respiratory alkalosis, hepatic encephalopathy, and major thermal burns. Hyperparathyroidism can also cause increased urinary losses of phosphorus leading to hypophosphatemia. Loss of phosphorus through the kidneys also occurs with acute volume expansion, osmotic diuresis, the use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide), and some malignancies.</p>
<p class="indent">Respiratory alkalosis can cause a decrease in phosphorus in the bloodstream because of an intracellular shift of phosphorus. Respiratory alkalosis, commonly caused by extreme hyperventilation, can reduce serum phosphate concentrations to very low levels and is a common cause of marked hypophosphatemia in patients who are hospitalized.</p>
<p class="indent">Some genetic disorders, such as Fanconi syndrome and X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, cause renal phosphate wasting. Acquired oncogenic osteomalacia, a paraneoplastic syndrome that occurs with some types of cancer, can also cause low phosphate levels. Hypophosphatemia is also a frequent complication of renal transplantation (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s263">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Most of the signs and symptoms of phosphorus deficiency result from a deficiency of ATP, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, or both (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>). ATP deficiency impairs cellular energy resources; diphosphoglycerate deficiency impairs oxygen delivery to tissues, resulting in generalized weakness and neurologic manifestations. Clinical signs and symptoms can be found in <a href="#tt10-10">Table&#x00A0;10-10</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">Muscle damage may develop as the ATP level in the muscle tissue declines. Clinical manifestations are muscle weakness, which may be subtle or profound and may affect any muscle group; muscle pain; and at times acute rhabdomyolysis (breakdown of skeletal muscle). Weakness of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles may greatly impair ventilation. Bone pain, altered mental status, seizures, focal neurologic signs, and heart failure can occur with severe hypophosphatemia (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s264">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">On laboratory analysis, the serum phosphorus level is less than 2.7 mg/dL (0.87 mmol/L). When reviewing laboratory results, the nurse should keep in mind that glucose or insulin administration causes a decrease in the serum phosphorus level. Acute hypophosphatemia can occur during the treatment of DKA due to high doses of insulin. Elevated PTH levels that occur as a result of hyperparathyroidism can lower blood levels of phosphate. A 24-hour urine collection for phosphorus can be done if renal-phosphate wasting is suspected. Fanconi syndrome causes loss of glucose, amino acids, uric acid, and phosphate in the urine. X-rays and bone density studies may show skeletal changes of reduced bone mineralization caused by osteomalacia or rickets. A technetium (Tc99m) sestamibi scan of the neck can be done to check for hyperparathyroidism. CT scan, MRI, or indium-111 octreotide scan may show oncogenic osteomalacia (decreased bone density due to cancer) (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Sharma &#x0026; Castro, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s265">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Prevention of hypophosphatemia is the goal. In patients at risk for hypophosphatemia, serum phosphate levels should be closely monitored and correction initiated before deficits become severe. Adequate amounts of phosphorus should be added to parenteral solutions, and attention should be paid to the phosphorus levels in enteral feeding solutions.</p>
<p class="indent">Medical management of hypophosphatemia depends on the etiology, and treatment of the cause is essential. Severe hypophosphatemia is dangerous and requires prompt attention. Oral phosphate supplements are usually adequate for mild hypophosphatemia. Sources of phosphorus include dairy foods, meats, and beans. Oral supplements may be sufficient to treat renal-wasting disorders, malabsorption, or oncogenic osteomalacia until an exact etiology is found. Vitamin D may also be necessary to enhance absorption of phosphorus and calcium.</p>
<p class="indent">Aggressive IV phosphorus correction is usually limited to the patient whose serum phosphorus levels decrease to less than 1 mg/dL (0.3 mmol/L). Possible effects of IV administration of phosphorus include tetany from hypocalcemia and calcifications in tissues (blood vessels, heart, lung, kidney, eyes) from hyperphosphatemia.</p>
<p class="indent">Recently a monoclonal antibody-type drug, burosumab, has been approved for patients with renal phosphate wasting disorders and hypophosphatemic rickets. This drug has been found to normalize phosphate levels, improve bone mineralization, and heal fractures in rickets (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Perwad &#x0026; Portale, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">If hyperparathyroidism is caused by parathyroid tumor, surgery may be necessary. A parathyroid tumor, termed an adenoma, can cause hyperparathyroidism with resulting demineralization of bone (osteomalacia). Patients with hyperparathyroidism can <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page256" title="256"></span>also be given calcimimetic medications, such as cinacalcet, which activate the calcium receptor in the gland and decrease PTH secretion (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Wang &#x0026; Yuan, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with oncogenic osteomalacia should be treated for the cancer causing this syndrome. If malabsorption is the cause of hypophosphatemia, treatment of the GI disorder is necessary. Because patients with osteomalacia are at high risk for fracture, fall precautions should be observed. If hypophosphatemia is caused by an eating disorder, the patient should obtain behavioral counseling and nutritional therapy.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s266">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse should identify patients at risk for hypophosphatemia and monitor them. Because patients who are malnourished and receiving parenteral nutrition are at risk when calories are introduced too aggressively, preventive measures involve gradually introducing the solution to avoid rapid shifts of phosphorus into the cells. Vitamin D and calcium levels should also be monitored as phosphate levels are influenced by these levels. Vitamin D supplementation may be needed to enhance calcium and phosphate absorption (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Aubry et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">In patients requiring correction of phosphorus losses, the nurse frequently monitors serum phosphorus levels and documents and reports early signs of hypophosphatemia (apprehension, confusion, change in level of consciousness). If the patient experiences mild hypophosphatemia, foods such as milk and milk products, organ meats, beans, nuts, fish, poultry, and whole grains should be encouraged. With moderate hypophosphatemia, supplements such as Neutra-Phos capsules, K-Phos, and Fleet Phospho-Soda may be prescribed (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Vallerand &#x0026; Sanoski, 2019</a>; <a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Yu &#x0026; Stubbs, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">For patients with severe hypophosphatemia, IV preparations of phosphorus are available as sodium or potassium phosphate. The rate of phosphorus administration should not exceed 3 mmol/h, and the site should be carefully monitored because tissue sloughing and necrosis can occur with infiltration. Serum calcium and phosphate blood levels should be monitored every 6 hours with IV therapy.</p>
<h3 class="superMheadpH2" id="s267">Phosphorus Excess (Hyperphosphatemia)</h3>
<p class="nonindent">Hyperphosphatemia is a serum phosphorus level that exceeds 4.5 mg/dL (1.45 mmol/L). Abnormally high levels of phosphate in the bloodstream can arise from excessive intake of phosphorus, decreased excretion of phosphorus, or a disorder that shifts intracellular phosphate into the extracellular space.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s268">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Various conditions can lead to hyperphosphatemia; however, the most common is kidney injury, which diminishes urinary phosphate excretion (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Stubbs &#x0026; Yu, 2019</a>). When renal insufficiency progresses to 40% to 50% of renal function, hyperphosphatemia can occur. Other causes include increased intake or a shift of phosphate from the intracellular to extracellular space. Conditions such as excessive vitamin D intake, administration of total parenteral nutrition, chemotherapy for neoplastic disease, hypoparathyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism, metabolic or respiratory acidosis, DKA, acute hemolysis, high phosphate intake, profound muscle necrosis, and increased phosphorus absorption may also lead to this phosphorus imbalance. Hypoparathyroidism causes hyperphosphatemia by failure of the kidneys to inhibit renal reabsorption of phosphate. The kidneys reabsorb excessive phosphate into the bloodstream. Pseudohypoparathyroidism is a disorder caused by end-organ resistance to PTH. Excessive use of phosphate-containing laxatives or enemas can also lead to hyperphosphatemia. False elevation of phosphate in the bloodstream can occur with elevated protein or bilirubin levels, dyslipidemia, or hemolysis. The primary complication of increased phosphorus is metastatic calcification in the organs, soft tissues, joints, and arteries. Arterial calcification is a risk factor for myocardial infarction, stroke, and peripheral arterial disease (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>; <a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Stubbs &#x0026; Yu, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s269">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Clinical signs and symptoms can be found in <a href="#tt10-10">Table&#x00A0;10-10</a>. Most symptoms result from decreased calcium levels and soft tissue calcifications. The most important short-term consequence is tetany (severe muscle cramping). Because of the reciprocal relationship between phosphorus and calcium, a high serum phosphorus level tends to cause a low serum calcium concentration. Hypocalcemia causes neuromuscular irritability and muscle spasms (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Bove-Fenderson &#x0026; Mannstadt, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The major long-term consequence is soft tissue calcification, which occurs mainly in patients with a reduced glomerular filtration rate. High serum levels of inorganic phosphorus promote precipitation of calcium phosphate in nonosseous sites, which can decrease urine output, impair vision, and produce palpitations. Skin and soft tissue deposits of calcium can cause pruritus (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Marcucci, Cianferotti, &#x0026; Brandi, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s270">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">On laboratory analysis, the serum phosphorus level exceeds 4.5 mg/dL (1.5 mmol/L). The serum calcium level is useful also for diagnosing the primary disorder and assessing the effects of treatments. X-rays may show skeletal changes with abnormal bone development. PTH levels are decreased in hypoparathyroidism. BUN and creatinine levels are used to assess renal function (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Marcucci et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s271">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Phosphate intake should be reduced and phosphate binders can be given with meals to reduce hyperphosphatemia. When possible, treatment is directed at the underlying disorder. For example, hyperphosphatemia may be related to volume depletion or respiratory or metabolic acidosis. Correction of these disorders may normalize the blood level of phosphate.</p>
<p class="indent">Calcium carbonate or calcium citrate are phosphate binders that can be used to lower blood phosphate levels. However, careful monitoring of calcium is essential as hypercalcemia can result. Phosphate binding resins that do not contain calcium include sevelamer and lanthanum. Sucroferric oxyhydroxide can also be used particularly in patients who require iron supplementation. Forced diuresis with a loop diuretic or saline diuresis can be used in patients with normal renal function. Hemodialysis can also lower phosphorus (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib756">Carfagna, Del Vecchio, Pontoriero, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 256</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page257" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="257">p. 257</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s272">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse monitors patients at risk for hyperphosphatemia. If a low phosphorus diet is prescribed, the patient is instructed to avoid phosphorus-rich foods, such as hard cheeses, cream, nuts, meats, whole-grain cereals, dried fruits, dried vegetables, kidneys, sardines, and dairy foods (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Shimada, Shutto-Uchita, &#x0026; Yamabe, 2019</a>). When appropriate, the nurse instructs the patient to avoid phosphate-containing laxatives and enemas. When administering phosphate binders, calcium levels should be monitored as well. During diuresis the nurse monitors urine output. The nurse also educates the patient about recognizing the signs of hypocalcemia, such as muscle cramping (Goltzman, 2019a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>