<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s302">Acute and Chronic Respiratory Alkalosis (Carbonic Acid Deficit)</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Respiratory alkalosis is a clinical condition in which the arterial pH is greater than 7.45 and the PaCO<sub>2</sub> is less than 35 mm Hg. As with respiratory acidosis, acute and chronic conditions can cause this acid&#x2013;base disturbance.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s303">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Respiratory alkalosis is caused by hyperventilation, which causes excessive loss or &#x201C;blowing off&#x201D; of CO<sub>2</sub> and, hence, there is a decrease in the plasma carbonic acid concentration (see carbonic acid equation). Causes include extreme anxiety such as panic disorder, hypoxemia, salicylate intoxication, gram-negative sepsis, and inappropriate ventilator settings.</p>
<p class="indent">Chronic respiratory alkalosis results from chronic hypocapnia which leads to decreased serum H<sup>+</sup> ion, resulting in alkalosis. Chronic hepatic insufficiency and cerebral tumors can cause chronic hyperventilation that leads to chronic respiratory alkalosis (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib814">Schwartzstein, Richards, Edlow, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s304">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Clinical signs of respiratory alkalosis consist of lightheadedness and inability to concentrate due to cerebral artery vasoconstriction and decreased cerebral blood flow, numbness and tingling from decreased calcium ionization in the bloodstream, tinnitus, and sometimes loss of consciousness. Cardiac effects of respiratory alkalosis include tachycardia and ventricular and atrial arrhythmias (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Schwartzstein et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s305">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Analysis of ABGs assists in the diagnosis of both acute and chronic respiratory alkalosis. In the acute state, the pH is elevated above normal (greater than 7.45) as a result of a low PaCO<sub>2</sub> and a normal bicarbonate level. The kidneys take days to compensate for acid&#x2013;base imbalances. Therefore, the kidneys cannot alter the bicarbonate level in the bloodstream quickly enough and medical intervention is necessary (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">In the compensated state of chronic respiratory alkalosis, the kidneys have had sufficient time to lower the bicarbonate level to a near-normal level. Evaluation of serum electrolytes is indicated to identify any decrease in potassium, as hydrogen is pulled out of the cells in exchange for potassium. A decreased calcium level may occur as severe alkalosis inhibits calcium ionization, resulting in carpopedal spasms and tetany. A decreased phosphate level can occur due to alkalosis because there is increased uptake of phosphate by the cells. A toxicology screen should be performed to rule out salicylate intoxication due to aspirin poisoning (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Schwartzstein et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s306">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment depends on the exact underlying cause of respiratory alkalosis. If the cause is anxiety, the patient is instructed to breathe more slowly to allow CO<sub>2</sub> to accumulate or to breathe into a closed system (such as a paper bag or CO<sub>2</sub> rebreather mask). An antianxiety agent may be required to relieve hyperventilation in very anxious patients. Treatment of other causes of respiratory alkalosis is directed at correcting the underlying problem.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>