<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s273">Chloride Imbalances</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Chloride (Cl<sup>&#x2212;</sup>) is the major anion of the ECF compartment. It maintains cellular integrity by providing water balance and maintains acid&#x2013;base balance. Sodium and chloride make up the electrolytes that exert osmotic pressure. Chloride is also contained in gastric and pancreatic juices, sweat, bile, and saliva. Chloride is produced in the stomach, where it combines with hydrogen to form hydrochloric acid. Chloride control depends on the intake of chloride and the excretion and reabsorption of its ions in the kidneys. A small amount of chloride is lost in the feces (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The normal serum chloride level is 97 to 107 mEq/L (97 to 107 mmol/L). Inside the cell, the chloride level is 4 mEq/L. The serum level of chloride reflects a change in dilution or concentration of the ECF and does so in direct proportion to the sodium concentration. Serum osmolality parallels chloride levels as well. Aldosterone secretion increases sodium reabsorption, thereby increasing chloride reabsorption (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Hall, 2016</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The choroid plexus, which secretes cerebrospinal fluid in the brain, depends on sodium and chloride to attract water to form the fluid portion of the cerebrospinal fluid.</p>
<p class="indent">Bicarbonate has an inverse relationship with chloride. As chloride moves from plasma into the RBCs (called the <em>chloride shift</em>), bicarbonate moves back into the plasma. Hydrogen ions are formed, which then help release oxygen from hemoglobin (Emmett &#x0026; Szerlip, 2017a). When the level of one of these three electrolytes (sodium, bicarbonate, or chloride) is disturbed, the other two are also affected. Chloride assists in maintaining acid&#x2013;base balance and works as a buffer in the exchange of oxygen and CO<sub>2</sub> in RBCs (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Fischbach &#x0026; Fischbach, 2018</a>). Chloride is primarily obtained from the diet as table salt. The chloride imbalances are chloride deficit and chloride excess (<a href="#tt10-11">Table&#x00A0;10-11</a>).</p>
<h3 class="superMheadpH2" id="s274">Chloride Deficit (Hypochloremia)</h3>
<p class="nonindent">Hypochloremia is a serum chloride level below 97 mEq/L (97 mmol/L).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s275">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hypochloremia can occur with GI tube drainage, gastric suctioning, gastric surgery, and severe vomiting and diarrhea. Administration of chloride-deficient IV solutions, low sodium intake, decreased serum sodium levels, DKA, chronic respiratory acidosis, massive blood transfusions, diuretic therapy, excessive sweating, burns, SIADH, and fever may cause hypochloremia. Administration of aldosterone, ACTH, corticosteroids, bicarbonate, excess diuretics, or laxatives decreases serum chloride levels as well. As chloride decreases (usually because of volume depletion), sodium and bicarbonate ions are retained by the kidney to balance the loss. Bicarbonate accumulates in the ECF, which raises the pH and can lead to hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (Emmett &#x0026; Szerlip, 2017a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s276">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The signs and symptoms of hypochloremia are outlined in <a href="#tt10-11">Table&#x00A0;10-11</a>. The signs and symptoms of hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis may also be present. Metabolic alkalosis is a disorder that results in a high pH and a high serum bicarbonate level as a result of excess alkali intake <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page258" title="258"></span>or loss of hydrogen ions. With compensation, the partial pressure of CO<sub>2</sub> in arterial blood (PaCO<sub>2</sub>) increases to 50 mm Hg. Hyperexcitability of muscles, tetany, hyperactive DTRs, weakness, twitching, and muscle cramps may result. Hypokalemia can cause hypochloremia, resulting in cardiac arrhythmias. In addition, because low chloride levels parallel low sodium levels, a water excess may occur. Hyponatremia can cause seizures and coma (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt10-11">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;10-11</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Chloride Imbalances</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Imbalance</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Contributing Factors</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Signs/Symptoms and Laboratory Findings</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Chloride deficit (hypochloremia)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Serum chloride &#x003C;96 mEq/L</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Addison disease, reduced chloride intake or absorption, untreated diabetic ketoacidosis, chronic respiratory acidosis, excessive sweating, vomiting, gastric suction, diarrhea, sodium and potassium deficiency, metabolic alkalosis; loop, osmotic, or thiazide diuretic use; overuse of bicarbonate, rapid removal of ascitic fluid with a high sodium content, IV fluids that lack chloride (dextrose and water), draining fistulas and ileostomies, heart failure, cystic fibrosis</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Agitation, irritability, tremors, muscle cramps, hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, hypertonicity, tetany, slow shallow respirations, seizures, arrhythmias, coma</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Labs indicate:</em> &#x2193; serum chloride, &#x2193; serum sodium, &#x2191; pH, &#x2191; serum bicarbonate, &#x2191; total carbon dioxide content, &#x2193; urine chloride level, &#x2193; serum potassium</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Chloride excess (hyperchloremia)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Serum chloride &#x003E;108 mEq/L</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Excessive sodium chloride infusions with water loss, head injury (sodium retention), hypernatremia, kidney injury, corticosteroid use, dehydration, severe diarrhea (loss of bicarbonate), respiratory alkalosis, administration of diuretics, overdose of salicylates, sodium polystyrene sulfonate, acetazolamide, phenylbutazone and ammonium chloride use, hyperparathyroidism, metabolic acidosis</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Tachypnea, lethargy, weakness, deep rapid respirations, decline in cognitive status, &#x2193; cardiac output, dyspnea, tachycardia, pitting edema, arrhythmias, coma</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Labs indicate:</em> &#x2191; serum chloride, &#x2191; serum potassium and sodium, &#x2193; serum pH, &#x2193; serum bicarbonate, normal anion gap, &#x2191; urinary chloride level</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">&#x2193;, decreased; &#x2191;, increased; IV, intravenous.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Norris, T. L. (2019). <em>Porth&#x2019;s pathophysiology: Concepts of altered health state</em> (10th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s277">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to the chloride level, sodium and potassium levels are also evaluated, because these electrolytes are lost along with chloride. ABG analysis identifies the acid&#x2013;base imbalance, which is usually metabolic alkalosis. The urine chloride level, which is also measured, decreases in hypochloremia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s278">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment involves correcting the cause of hypochloremia and the contributing electrolyte and acid&#x2013;base imbalances. Normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride) or half-strength saline (0.45% sodium chloride) solution is given by IV to replace the chloride. If the patient is receiving a diuretic (loop, osmotic, or thiazide), it may be discontinued or another diuretic prescribed (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Ammonium chloride, an acidifying IV agent, may be prescribed to treat metabolic alkalosis; the dosage depends on the patient&#x2019;s weight and serum chloride level. This agent is metabolized by the liver, and its effects last for about 3 days. Its use should be avoided in patients with impaired liver or renal function (Emmett &#x0026; Szerlip, 2017b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s279">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse monitors the patient&#x2019;s I&#x0026;O, ABG values, and serum electrolyte levels. Changes in the patient&#x2019;s level of consciousness and muscle strength and movement are reported to the primary provider promptly. Vital signs are monitored, and respiratory assessment is carried out frequently. The nurse provides and educates the patient about foods with high chloride content, which include tomato juice, bananas, dates, eggs, cheese, milk, salty broth, canned vegetables, and processed meats. A person who drinks free water (water without electrolytes) or bottled water and excretes large amounts of chloride needs instruction to avoid drinking this kind of water (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<h3 class="superMheadpH2" id="s280">Chloride Excess (Hyperchloremia)</h3>
<p class="nonindent">Hyperchloremia exists when the serum level of chloride exceeds 107 mEq/L (107 mmol/L). Hypernatremia, bicarbonate loss, and metabolic acidosis can occur with high chloride levels.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s281">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">High serum chloride levels are almost exclusively a result of iatrogenically induced hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, stemming from excessive administration of chloride relative to sodium, most commonly as 0.9% normal saline solution, 0.45% normal saline solution, or lactated Ringer&#x2019;s solution. This condition can also be caused by the loss of bicarbonate ions via the kidney or the GI tract with a corresponding increase in chloride ions. Chloride ions in the form of acidifying salts accumulate, and acidosis occurs with a decrease in bicarbonate ions. Head trauma, increased perspiration, excess adrenocortical hormone production, and decreased glomerular filtration can lead to a high serum chloride level (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s282">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The signs and symptoms of hyperchloremia are the same as those of metabolic acidosis: hypervolemia and hypernatremia. Tachypnea, weakness, lethargy, deep and rapid respirations, diminished cognitive ability, and hypertension occur. If untreated, hyperchloremia can lead to a decrease in cardiac output, arrhythmias, and coma. A high chloride level is accompanied by a high sodium level and fluid retention (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s283">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The serum chloride level is 108 mEq/L (108 mmol/L) or greater, the serum sodium level is greater than 145 mEq/L (145 mmol/L), the serum pH is less than 7.35, and the serum bicarbonate level is less than 22 mEq/L (22 mmol/L). Urine chloride levels are elevated.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s284">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Correcting the underlying cause of hyperchloremia and restoring electrolyte, fluid, and acid&#x2013;base balance are essential. Hypotonic IV solutions may be given to restore balance. Lactated Ringer&#x2019;s solution may be prescribed to convert lactate to bicarbonate in the liver, which increases the bicarbonate level and corrects the acidosis. IV sodium bicarbonate may be given to increase bicarbonate levels, which leads to the renal excretion of chloride ions because bicarbonate and chloride compete for combination with sodium. Diuretics may be given to eliminate chloride as well. Sodium, chloride, and fluids are restricted (<a href="c10-sec20.xhtml#bib842">Squiers, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s285">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Monitoring vital signs, ABG values, and I&#x0026;O is important to assess the patient&#x2019;s status and the effectiveness of treatment. Assessment findings related to respiratory, neurologic, and cardiac systems are documented, and changes are discussed with the primary provider. The nurse educates the patient about the diet that should be followed to manage hyperchloremia and maintain adequate hydration.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>