<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s379">Diagnosis of Cancer</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A cancer diagnosis is based on assessment of physiologic and functional changes and results of the diagnostic evaluation. Patients with suspected cancer undergo extensive testing to (1) determine the presence and extent of cancer, (2) identify possible disease metastasis, (3) evaluate the function of involved and uninvolved body systems and organs, and (4) obtain tissue and cells for analysis, including evaluation of tumor stage and grade. The diagnostic evaluation includes a review of systems; physical examination; imaging studies; laboratory tests of blood, urine, and other body fluids; procedures; and pathologic analysis. A selection of diagnostic tests is found in <a href="#tt12-4">Table&#x00A0;12-4</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients undergoing extensive testing may be fearful of the procedures and anxious about possible test results. Nurses help address the patient&#x2019;s fear and anxiety by explaining the tests to be performed, the sensations likely to be experienced, and the patient&#x2019;s role in the test procedures. The nurse encourages the patient and family to voice their fears about the test results, supports the patient and family throughout the diagnostic evaluation, and reinforces and clarifies information conveyed by the primary provider. The nurse also encourages the patient and family to communicate, share their concerns, and discuss their questions and concerns with one another.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s380">Tumor Staging and Grading</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A complete diagnostic evaluation includes identifying the stage and grade of the tumor. This is accomplished prior to treatment to provide baseline data for evaluating outcomes of therapy and to maintain a systematic and consistent approach to ongoing diagnosis and treatment. Cancer treatment options and prognosis are based on the cancer type; stage and grade of cancer; as well as the individual&#x2019;s health status and response to treatment (NCI, 2019c).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 309</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page310" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="310">p. 310</span></div>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt12-3">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;12-3</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">American Cancer Society Screening Guidelines for the Early Detection of Cancer<em><sup><a href="#fn10" id="ft10">a</a></sup></em></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Cancer Site</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Population</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Test or Procedure</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Recommendation</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Breast</strong></p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Women, ages 40&#x2013;54</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Mammography</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Women should undergo regular screening mammography starting at age 45 yrs.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Women ages 45&#x2013;54 should be screened annually.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Women should have the opportunity to begin annual screening between the ages of 40 and 44.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Women age 55 and over</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Mammography</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Transition to biennial screening or can continue annual screening. Continue screening if overall health is good and life expectancy is 10+ yrs.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Cervix</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Women, ages 21&#x2013;29</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Papanicolaou (Pap) test</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Screening should be done every 3 yrs with conventional or liquid-based Pap tests.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">HPV DNA testing only for abnormal Pap test.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2"></td><td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Women ages 30&#x2013;65</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Women ages 66+</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Pap test and HPV DNA test</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Screening should be done every 5 yrs with both the HPV test and the Pap test (preferred), or every 3 yrs with the Pap test alone (acceptable).</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Women ages 66+ who have regular cervical cancer screening with negative results should stop cervical cancer screening.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Women who have had a total hysterectomy should stop cervical cancer screening.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Colorectal<em><sup><a href="#fn11" id="ft11">b</a></sup></em></p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Men and women, ages 45&#x2013;75.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">People aged 76&#x2013;84, should discuss continued screening with their provider.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">People 85+ should no longer participate in colorectal cancer screenings.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Highly sensitive guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) or highly sensitive fecal immunochemical test (FIT)</p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Annual highly sensitive gFOBT or FIT testing.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Multi-targeted stool DNA test (MT-sDNA) test</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">MT-sDNA testing every 3 yrs.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Flexible sigmoidoscopy (FSIG), or</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Every 5 yrs.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Colonoscopy, or</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Every 10 yrs.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1"></td><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy)</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Every 5 yrs.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Endometrial</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Women, at menopause</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">At the time of menopause, women at average risk should be informed about risks and symptoms of endometrial cancer and encouraged to report any unexpected bleeding or spotting to their providers.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Not applicable (N/A)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Lung</strong></p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Current or former smokers (quit within past 15 yrs) ages 55&#x2013;74 in fairly good health with at least a 30 pack-year history.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Low-dose CT (LDCT)</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">LDCT annually.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Providers with access to high-volume, high-quality lung cancer screening and treatment centers should initiate a discussion about lung cancer screening with apparently healthy patients aged 55&#x2013;74 who have at least a 30 pack-year smoking history, and who currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 yrs. Patient has been involved in the process of informed and shared decision making with a provider related to the potential benefits, limitations, and harms associated with screening for lung cancer with LDCT should occur before any decision is made to initiate lung cancer screening. Smoking cessation counseling remains a high priority for clinical attention in discussions with current smokers, who should be informed of their continuing risk of lung cancer. Screening should not be viewed as an alternative to smoking cessation.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Prostate</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Men, age 50+, African American Men, age 45+</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Men who have at least a 10-yr life expectancy should have an opportunity to make an informed decision with their providers about whether to be screened for prostate cancer, after receiving information about the potential benefits, risks, and uncertainties associated with prostate cancer screening. Prostate cancer screening should not occur without an informed decision making process.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page311" title="311"></span><strong>Cancer-related checkup</strong></p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Men and women, age 20+</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">On the occasion of a periodic health examination, the cancer-related checkup should include examination for cancers of the thyroid, testicles, ovaries, lymph nodes, oral cavity, and skin, as well as health counseling about tobacco, sun exposure, diet and nutrition, risk factors, sexual practices, and environmental and occupational exposures.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">N/A</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">CT, computed tomography; DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; HPV, human papillomavirus.</p>
<p class="tablesource"><em><sup><a href="#ft10" id="fn10">a</a></sup></em>All individuals should become familiar with the potential benefits, limitations, and harms associated with cancer screening.</p>
<p class="tablesource"><em><sup><a href="#ft11" id="fn11">b</a></sup></em>All positive tests (other than colonoscopy) should be followed up with colonoscopy.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from American Cancer Society (ACS). (2018). American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer. Retrieved on 7/5/2019 at: <a href="http://www.cancer.org/healthy/find-cancer-early/cancer-screening-guidelines/american-cancer-society-guidelines-for-the-early-detection-of-cancer.html">www.cancer.org/healthy/find-cancer-early/cancer-screening-guidelines/american-cancer-society-guidelines-for-the-early-detection-of-cancer.html</a></p>
</div>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt12-4">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;12-4</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Select Diagnostic Tests Used to Detect Cancer</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Test</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Description</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Examples of Diagnostic Uses</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Tumor marker identification</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Analysis of biochemical mediators found in tumor tissue, blood, or other body fluids that are indicative of cancer cells or specific characteristics of cancer cells. These biochemical mediators may also be found in some normal body tissues.</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast, colon, lung, ovarian, testicular, prostate cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Genetic tumor markers (also called prognostic indicators)</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Analysis for the presence of mutations (alterations) in genes found in tumors or body tissues. Assists in diagnosis, selection of treatment, prediction of response to therapy, and risk of progression or recurrence.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast, lung, kidney, ovarian, brain cancers; leukemia; and lymphoma. Many uses of genetic profiling are considered investigational.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Mammography</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of x-ray images of the breast.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Breast cancer</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of magnetic fields and radiofrequency signals to create sectioned images of various body structures.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Neurologic, pelvic, abdominal, thoracic, breast cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Computed tomography (CT) scan</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of narrow-beam x-ray to scan successive layers of tissue for a cross-sectional view.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Neurologic, pelvic, skeletal, abdominal, thoracic cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Fluoroscopy</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of x-rays that identify contrasts in body tissue densities; may involve the use of contrast agents.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Skeletal, lung, gastrointestinal cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Ultrasonography (ultrasound)</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">High-frequency sound waves echoing off body tissues are converted electronically into images; used to assess tissues deep within the body.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Abdominal and pelvic cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Endoscopy</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Direct visualization of a body cavity or passageway by insertion of an endoscope into a body cavity or opening; allows tissue biopsy, fluid aspiration, and excision of small tumors. Used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Bronchial, gastrointestinal cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Nuclear medicine imaging</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Uses IV injection or ingestion of radioisotopes followed by imaging of tissues that have concentrated the radioisotopes.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Bone, liver, kidney, spleen, brain, and thyroid cancers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Positron emission tomography (PET)</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Through the use of a tracer, provides black-and-white or color-coded images of the biologic activity of a particular area, rather than its structure. Used in detection of cancer or its response to treatment.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Lung, colon, liver, pancreatic, head and neck cancers; Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma and melanoma</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">PET fusion</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of a PET scanner and a CT scanner in one machine to provide an image combining anatomic detail, spatial resolution, and functional metabolic abnormalities.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">See PET</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Radioimmunoconjugates</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Monoclonal antibodies are labeled with a radioisotope and injected IV into the patient; the antibodies that aggregate at the tumor site are visualized with scanners.</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Colorectal, breast, ovarian, head and neck cancers; lymphoma and melanoma</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Vascular imaging</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of contrast agents that are injected into veins or arteries and monitored by fluoroscopy, CT, or MRI imaging in order to assess tumor vasculature. Used to assess tumor vascularity prior to surgical procedures.</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Liver and brain cancers</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Fischbach, F. T., &#x0026; Fischbach, M. A. (2018). <em>Fischbach&#x2019;s manual of laboratory and diagnostic tests</em> (10th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health.</p>
</div>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 311</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page312" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="312">p. 312</span></div>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct12-3"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;12-3</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>TNM Classification System</strong></p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">T The extent of the primary tumor</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">N The absence or presence and extent of regional lymph node metastasis</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">M The absence or presence of distant metastasis</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">The use of numerical subsets of the TNM components indicates the progressive extent of the malignant disease.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Primary Tumor (T)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">Tx Primary tumor cannot be assessed</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">T0 No evidence of primary tumor</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">Tis Carcinoma in situ</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">T1, T2, T3, T4 Increasing size or local extent of the primary tumor</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Regional Lymph Nodes (N)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">Nx Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">N0 No regional lymph node metastasis</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">N1, N2, N3 Increasing involvement of regional lymph nodes</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Distant Metastasis (M)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">Mx Distant metastasis cannot be assessed</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">M0 No distant metastasis</p>
<p class="BoxMTableMTX">M1 Distant metastasis</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). (2019c). Cancer staging guide. Retrieved on 7/20/2019 at: <a href="http://www.nccn.org/patients/resources/diagnosis/staging.aspx">www.nccn.org/patients/resources/diagnosis/staging.aspx</a></p>
</div>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;staging:&lt;/b&gt; process of determining the extent of disease, including tumor size and spread or metastasis to distant sites">Staging</button></strong> describes the size of the tumor, the existence of local invasion, lymph node involvement, and distant metastasis. Several systems exist for classifying the anatomic extent of disease. The tumor, nodes, and metastasis (TNM) system (see <a href="#ct12-3">Chart&#x00A0;12-3</a>) is the most common system used to describe the stage of many solid tumors (Amin, Greene, Edge, et al., 2017; NCCN, 2019c).</p>
<p class="indent">Staging provides a common language used by health care providers and scientists to accurately communicate about cancer across clinical settings and in research. These systems also provide a convenient shorthand notation that condenses lengthy descriptions into manageable terms for comparisons of treatments and prognoses.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;grading:&lt;/b&gt; identification of the type of tissue from which the tumor originated and the degree to which the tumor cells retain the functional and structural characteristics of the tissue of origin">Grading</button></strong> is the pathologic classification of tumor cells (NCI, 2019c). Grading systems seek to define the type of tissue from which the tumor originated and the degree to which the tumor cells retain the functional and histologic characteristics of the tissue of origin (differentiation). Samples of cells used to establish the tumor grade may be obtained from tissue scrapings, body fluids, secretions, washings, biopsy, or surgical excision. This information helps providers predict the behavior and prognosis of various tumors. The grade corresponds with a numeric value ranging from I to IV. Grade I tumors, also known as well-differentiated tumors, closely resemble the tissue of origin in structure and function. Tumors that do not clearly resemble the tissue of origin in structure or function are described as poorly differentiated or undifferentiated and are assigned grade IV. These tumors tend to be more aggressive, less responsive to treatment, and associated with a poorer prognosis as compared to well-differentiated, grade I tumors. Various staging and grading systems are used to characterize cancers.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s381">Anatomic Stage Group</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Once the diagnosis, clinical stage, and histologic grade have been determined, the anatomic stage group, designated by I through IV (representing increasing severity of disease), is assigned to facilitate communication, treatment decisions, and estimation of prognosis. The anatomic stage group is also useful for comparing clinical outcomes.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>