<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s471">Psychosocial Factors</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse anticipates that most patients have emotional reactions prior to surgery&#x2014;obvious or veiled, normal or abnormal. Fear may be related to the unknown, lack of control, or of death and may be influenced by anesthesia, pain, complications, cancer, or prior surgical experience. Preoperative anxiety can be a preemptive response to a threat to the patient&#x2019;s role in life, a permanent incapacity or body integrity, increased responsibilities or burden on family members, or life itself. Less obvious concerns may occur because of previous experiences with the health care system and people the patient has known with the same condition. Psychological distress directly influences body functioning. Identification of anxiety by the health care team using supportive guidance at every juncture of the perioperative process helps to ease anxiety. Research suggests that negative postoperative outcomes can result from fear and anxiety preoperatively. Anxiety triggers a physical response, stimulating the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine, which in turn raises blood pressure and increases heart rate, cardiac output, and blood glucose levels. Therefore, overall healing may be impaired while pain and risk of infection may increase postoperatively (<a href="c14-sec12.xhtml#bib1230">Bagheri, Ebrahimi, Abbasi, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">People express fear in different ways. Some patients may ask repeated questions, regardless of information already shared with them. Others may withdraw, deliberately avoiding communication by reading, watching television, or talking about trivialities. Consequently, the nurse must be empathetic, listen well, and provide information that helps alleviate concerns.</p>
<p class="indent">An important outcome of the psychosocial assessment is the determination of the extent and role of the patient&#x2019;s support network. The value and reliability of available support systems are assessed. Other information, such as knowledge of the usual level of functioning and typical daily activities, may assist in the patient&#x2019;s care and recovery. Assessing the patient&#x2019;s readiness to learn and determining the best approach to maximize comprehension provide the basis for preoperative patient education. This is of particular importance in patients who are developmentally delayed and those who are cognitively impaired, where the approach to patient education and consent will include the legal guardian.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s472">Spiritual and Cultural Beliefs</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Showing respect for a patient&#x2019;s cultural values and beliefs facilitates rapport and trust. Assessment includes identifying the ethnic group to which the patient relates and the customs and beliefs the patient holds about illness and health care providers. Knowledge of the patient&#x2019;s physiologic, psychosocial, cultural, spiritual, and educational needs allows the perioperative nurse to provide a holistic approach to care. A holistic picture of the patient allows the perioperative nurse the opportunity to identify patient care issues that extend beyond the medical diagnosis and planned surgical procedure and choose a nursing diagnosis based on key elements of the patient&#x2019;s needs and goals. The nurse advocates for the patient and develops a holistic care plan that is communicated to members of the intraoperative and postoperative team. Perioperative patient advocacy entails paying respect to other human beings, preserving the patient&#x2019;s expressed values, and treating all patients equally (<a href="c14-sec12.xhtml#bib1250">Sundqvist, Holmefur, Nilsson, et&#x00A0;al., 2016</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Certain ethnic groups are unaccustomed to expressing feelings openly with strangers, and nurses need to consider this pattern of communication when assessing pain. In some cultural groups, it is seen as impolite to make direct eye contact with others and doing so is seen as disrespectful. The nurse should know that this lack of eye contact is not avoidance nor does it reflect a lack of interest. Other ethnicities view the top of the head as sacred; therefore, a nurse would not put the surgical cap on the patient but would ask the patient to don the cap.</p>
<p class="indent">Perhaps the most valuable skill at the nurse&#x2019;s disposal is listening carefully to the patient and observing body language, especially when obtaining the history. Invaluable information and insights may be gained through effective communication and interviewing skills. An unhurried, understanding, and caring nurse promotes confidence on the part of the patient.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 407</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page408" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="408">p. 408</span></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>