<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s450">Perioperative Nursing</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Communication, teamwork, and patient assessment are crucial to ensure good patient outcomes in the perioperative setting. Professional perioperative and perianesthesia nursing standards encompass the domains of behavioral response, physiologic response, and patient safety and are used as guides toward development of nursing diagnoses, interventions, and plans. Perioperative nursing, which spans the entire surgical experience, consists of three phases that begin and end at particular points in the sequence of surgical experience events. The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;preoperative phase:&lt;/b&gt; period of time from when the decision for surgical intervention is made to when the patient is transferred to the operating room table">preoperative phase</button></strong> begins when the decision to proceed with surgical intervention is made and ends with the transfer of the patient onto the operating room (OR) bed. The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;intraoperative phase:&lt;/b&gt; period of time that begins with transfer of the patient to the operating room area and continues until the patient is admitted to the postanesthesia care unit">intraoperative phase</button></strong> begins when the patient is transferred onto the OR bed and ends with admission to the PACU. Intraoperative nursing responsibilities involve acting as scrub nurse, circulating nurse, or registered nurse first assistant (see <a href="c15.xhtml">Chapter 15</a> for the description of these roles). The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;postoperative phase:&lt;/b&gt; period of time that begins with the admission of the patient to the postanesthesia care unit and ends after follow-up evaluation in the clinical setting or home">postoperative phase</button></strong> begins with the admission of the patient to the PACU and ends with a follow-up evaluation in the clinical setting or home (see <a href="c16.xhtml">Chapter 16</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Each <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;perioperative phase:&lt;/b&gt; period of time that constitutes the surgical experience; includes the preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative phases of nursing care">perioperative phase</button></strong> includes the many diverse activities a nurse performs, using the nursing process, and is based on the recommended practice standards of the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN), formerly known as the Association of Operating Room Nurses (AORN, 2019) and the American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses (ASPAN, 2019). <a href="c14-sec04.xhtml#ct14-1">Chart&#x00A0;14-1</a> presents examples of nursing activities characteristic of the three perioperative phases of care. The phases of the surgical experience are reviewed in more detail in this chapter and in the other chapters in this unit.</p>
<p class="indent">A conceptual model of patient care, published by AORN, helps delineate the relationships between various components of nursing practice and patient outcomes into four domains: safety, physiologic responses, behavioral responses, and health care systems. The first three domains reflect phenomena of concern to perioperative nurses and are composed of nursing diagnoses, interventions, and outcomes. The fourth domain&#x2014;the health care system&#x2014;consists of structural data elements and focuses on clinical processes and outcomes. The model is used to depict the relationship of nursing process components to the achievement of optimal patient outcomes (<a href="c14-sec12.xhtml#bib1260">Rothrock, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>