<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page396" title="396"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 14</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Preoperative Nursing Management</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Define the phases of perioperative patient care.</span></li>
<li><span>Perform a comprehensive preoperative assessment to identify pertinent health and surgical risk factors.</span></li>
<li><span>Describe considerations related to preoperative nursing care of older adult patients, patients with obesity, and patients with disability.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify the regulatory documents that are required prior to a patient entering surgery.</span></li>
<li><span>Initiate the immediate preoperative preparation and education of the patient.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Communication</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Managing Care</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Mobility</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">ambulatory surgery:</span> includes outpatient, same-day, or short-stay surgery that does not require an overnight hospital stay</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">bariatrics:</span> having to do with patients with obesity</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">history and physical:</span> mandatory form completed by the surgeon that gives a comprehensive overview of the patient&#x2019;s history, current physical status, and plan of care</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">informed consent:</span> the patient&#x2019;s autonomous decision about whether to undergo a surgical procedure, based on the nature of the condition, the treatment options, and the risks and benefits involved</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">intraoperative phase:</span> period of time that begins with transfer of the patient to the operating room area and continues until the patient is admitted to the postanesthesia care unit</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">minimally invasive surgery:</span> surgical procedures that use specialized instruments inserted into the body either through natural orifices or through small incisions</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">perioperative phase:</span> period of time that constitutes the surgical experience; includes the preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative phases of nursing care</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">postoperative phase:</span> period of time that begins with the admission of the patient to the postanesthesia care unit and ends after follow-up evaluation in the clinical setting or home</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">preadmission testing:</span> diagnostic testing performed before admission to the hospital</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">preoperative phase:</span> period of time from when the decision for surgical intervention is made to when the patient is transferred to the operating room table</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">As techniques to perform surgery have evolved with improved technology and expertise, surgery has become less invasive and less debilitating. The increased use of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;minimally invasive surgery:&lt;/b&gt; surgical procedures that use specialized instruments inserted into the body either through natural orifices or through small incisions">minimally invasive surgery</button></strong> (procedures that use specialized instruments inserted into the body either through natural orifices or through small incisions) enables many procedures to be performed on an outpatient basis. Surgery remains a complex, stressful experience, whether minimally invasive, elective, or emergent. Even healthy patients having elective outpatient surgery may experience unanticipated complications during otherwise benign procedures. Many patients enter the hospital 90 minutes prior to surgery and have necessary medical assessments and analyses preceding the surgical intervention. The surgery is followed by a recovery period in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU). Later that day the patient goes home. When comorbidities exist or procedures are more complex, the patient may have laboratory studies completed prior to admission, and may be admitted to the hospital for postoperative recovery.</p>
<p class="indent">Traumatic and emergency surgery most often results in prolonged hospital stays. Patients who are acutely ill or undergoing major surgery and patients with concurrent medical disorders <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page397" title="397"></span>may require supportive supplementary care from other medical disciplines, which can be coordinated more easily within the hospital setting. The high acuity level of surgical inpatients and the greater complexity of procedures have placed greater demands on the practice of nursing in this setting.</p>
<p class="indent">Although each setting (ambulatory, outpatient, or inpatient) offers its own unique advantages for the delivery of patient care, all patients require a comprehensive preoperative nursing assessment, patient education, and nursing interventions to prepare for surgery.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>