<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page437" title="437"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 16</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Postoperative Nursing Management</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe the responsibilities of the postanesthesia care nurse in the prevention of immediate postoperative complications.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify common postoperative problems and their management.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain variables that affect wound healing and surgical site infections.</span></li>
<li><span>Implement nursing care to enhance recovery in the postoperative phase.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the hospitalized patient recovering from surgery.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Assessment</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Infection</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Managing Care</p>
</div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dehiscence:</span> partial or complete separation of wound edges</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">evisceration:</span> protrusion of organs through the surgical incision</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">first-intention healing:</span> method of healing in which wound edges are surgically approximated and integumentary continuity is restored without granulation</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">phase I PACU:</span> area designated for care of surgical patients immediately after surgery and for patients whose condition warrants close monitoring</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">phase II PACU:</span> area designated for care of surgical patients who have been transferred from a phase I PACU because their condition no longer requires the close monitoring provided in a phase I PACU. The patient is prepared for transfer to an inpatient unit or for discharge from the facility</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">postanesthesia care unit (PACU):</span> area where postoperative patients are monitored as they recover from anesthesia</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">second-intention healing:</span> method of healing in which wound edges are not surgically approximated and integumentary continuity is restored by the process known as granulation</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">The postoperative period extends from the time the patient leaves the operating room (OR) until the last follow-up visit with the surgeon. This may be as short as a day or two or as long as several months. During the postoperative period, nursing care focuses on reestablishing the patient&#x2019;s physiologic equilibrium, alleviating pain, preventing complications, and educating the patient about self-care. Careful assessment and immediate intervention assist the patient in returning to optimal function quickly, safely, and as comfortable as possible. Ongoing care in the community through home care, clinic visits, office visits, or telephone follow-up facilitates an uncomplicated recovery.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>