<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s608">Laryngeal Obstruction</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Obstruction of the larynx because of edema is a serious condition that may be fatal without swift, decisive intervention. The larynx is a stiff box that will not stretch. It contains a narrow space between the vocal cords (glottis), through which air must pass. Swelling of the laryngeal mucous membranes may close off the opening tightly, leading to life-threatening hypoxia or suffocation. Edema of the glottis occurs rarely in patients with acute laryngitis, occasionally in patients with urticaria, and more frequently in patients with severe inflammation of the throat, as in scarlet fever. It is an occasional cause of death in severe anaphylaxis (angioedema).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 513</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page514" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="514">p. 514</span></div>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt18-3">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;18-3</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Causes of Laryngeal Obstruction</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Precipitating Event</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Mechanism of Obstruction</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">History of allergies; exposure to medications, latex, foods (peanuts, tree nuts [e.g., walnuts, pecans]), bee stings</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Anaphylaxis</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Foreign body</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhalation/ingestion of meat or other food items, coin, chewing gum, balloon fragments, drug packets (ingested to avoid criminal arrest)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Heavy alcohol consumption; heavy tobacco use</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Obstruction from tumor</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Family history of airway problems</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Suggests angioedema (type I hypersensitivity reaction)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Increased risk of angioedema of the mucous membranes</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Recent throat pain or recent fever</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Infectious process</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">History of surgery or previous tracheostomy</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Possible subglottic stenosis</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Reardon, R. F., Mason, P. E., &#x0026; Clinton, J. E. (2017). Basic airway management and decision-making. In J. D. Roberts (Ed.). <em>Roberts &#x0026; Hedges&#x2019; clinical procedures in emergency medicine</em> (7th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Hereditary angioedema is also characterized by episodes of life-threatening laryngeal edema. Laryngeal edema in people with hereditary angioedema can occur at any age, although young adults are at greatest risk (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Reardon, Mason, &#x0026; Clinton, 2017</a>). Some causes of laryngeal obstruction appear in <a href="#tt18-3">Table&#x00A0;18-3</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">When foreign bodies are aspirated into the pharynx, the larynx, or the trachea a twofold problem occurs. First, they obstruct the air passages and cause difficulty in breathing, which may lead to asphyxia; later, they may be drawn farther down, entering the bronchi or a bronchial branch and causing symptoms of irritation, such as a croupy cough, expectoration of blood or mucus, or labored breathing.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s609">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient&#x2019;s clinical presentation and x-ray findings confirm the diagnosis of laryngeal obstruction. The patient may demonstrate lowered oxygen saturation; however, normal oxygen saturation should not be interpreted as a sign that the obstruction is not significant. The use of accessory muscles to maximize airflow may occur and is often manifested by retractions in the neck or abdomen during inspirations. Patients who demonstrate these symptoms are at an immediate risk of collapse, and respiratory support (i.e., mechanical ventilation or positive-pressure ventilation) is considered.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s610">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A thorough history can be very useful in diagnosing and treating the patient with a laryngeal obstruction. However, emergency measures to secure the patient&#x2019;s airway should not be delayed to obtain a history or perform tests. If possible, the nurse obtains a history from the patient or family about heavy alcohol or tobacco consumption, ENDS use, current medications, history of airway problems, recent infections, pain or fever, dental pain or poor dentition, and any previous surgeries, radiation therapy, or trauma.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s611">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical management is based on the initial evaluation of the patient and the need to ensure a patent airway. If the airway is obstructed by a foreign body and signs of asphyxia are apparent, immediate treatment is necessary using principles from basic and advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). If all efforts are unsuccessful, an immediate tracheotomy is necessary (see <a href="c19.xhtml">Chapter 19</a> for further discussion). If the obstruction is caused by edema resulting from an allergic reaction, treatment may include immediate administration of subcutaneous epinephrine and a corticosteroid (see <a href="c33.xhtml">Chapter 33</a>). Ice may be applied to the neck in an effort to reduce edema. Continuous pulse oximetry is essential in the patient who has experienced acute upper airway obstruction (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1378">Reardon et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>