<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s581">Peritonsillar Abscess</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Peritonsillar abscess (also called <em>quinsy</em>) is the most common major suppurative complication of sore throat accounting for roughly 30% of soft tissue head and neck abscesses. It most commonly afflicts adults between the ages of 20 and 40 years, with the incidence roughly the same between men and women (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>). This collection of purulent exudate between the tonsillar capsule and the surrounding tissues, including the soft palate, may develop after an acute tonsillar infection that progresses to a local cellulitis and abscess. Several bacteria are typically implicated in the pathogenesis of these abscesses, including <em>S. pyogenes, S. aureus, Neisseria</em> species, and <em>Corynebacterium</em> species (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>; <a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Shah, 2018</a>). In more severe cases, the infection can spread over the palate and to the neck and chest. Edema can cause airway obstruction, which can be life-threatening and is a medical emergency. Peritonsillar abscess can be life-threatening with mediastinitis, intracranial abscess, and empyemas resulting from spread of infection. Early detection and aggressive management are essential (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s582">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient with a peritonsillar abscess is acutely ill with a severe sore throat, fever, trismus (inability to open the mouth), and drooling. Inflammation of the medial pterygoid muscle that lies lateral to the tonsil results in spasm, severe pain, and difficulty in opening the mouth fully. The pain may be so intense that the patient has difficulty swallowing saliva. The patient&#x2019;s breath often smells rancid. Other symptoms include a raspy voice, odynophagia (a severe sensation of burning, squeezing pain while swallowing), <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dysphagia:&lt;/b&gt; difficulty swallowing">dysphagia</button></strong> (difficulty swallowing), and otalgia (pain in the ear). Odynophagia is caused by the inflammation of the superior constrictor muscle of the pharynx that forms the lateral wall of the tonsil. This causes pain on lateral movement of the head. The patient may also have tender and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Examination of the oropharynx reveals erythema of the anterior pillar and soft palate as well as a purulent tonsil on the side of the peritonsillar abscess. The tonsil is pushed inferomedially, and the uvula is shifted contralaterally (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s583">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Emergency department (ED) physicians frequently are the providers who diagnose patients with peritonsillar abscesses. When this occurs in the ED setting, the ED physician decides whether aspiration&#x2014;an invasive procedure&#x2014;should be carried out based on the patient&#x2019;s clinical picture. Intraoral ultrasound and transcutaneous cervical ultrasound are used in the diagnosis of peritonsillar cellulitis and abscesses (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Gosselin, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s584">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Antimicrobial agents and corticosteroid therapy are used for the treatment of peritonsillar abscess. Antibiotics (usually <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page507" title="507"></span>penicillin) are extremely effective in controlling the infection, and if they are prescribed early in the course of the disease, the abscess may resolve without needing to be incised. However, if the abscess does not resolve, treatment choices include needle aspiration, incision and drainage under local or general anesthesia, and drainage of the abscess with simultaneous tonsillectomy. Following needle aspiration (discussed later) intramuscular administration of clindamycin can be used in the outpatient setting, thus reducing both antibiotic and hospital costs. The use of topical anesthetic agents and throat irrigations may be prescribed to promote comfort along with administration of prescribed analgesic agents (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with complications require hospitalization for IV antibiotics, imaging studies, observation, and proper airway management. Rarely, the patient with a peritonsillar abscess presents with acute airway obstruction and requires immediate airway management. Procedures may include intubation, cricothyroidotomy, or tracheotomy (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Needle aspiration may be preferred over a more extensive procedure due to its high efficacy, low cost, and patient tolerance. The mucous membrane over the swelling is first sprayed with a topical anesthetic and then injected with a local anesthetic. Single or repeated needle aspirations are performed to decompress the abscess. Alternatively, the abscess may be incised and drained (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>). These procedures are performed best with the patient in the sitting position to make it easier to expectorate the pus and blood that accumulate in the pharynx. The patient experiences almost immediate relief. Incision and drainage is also an effective option but is more painful than needle aspiration.</p>
<p class="indent">Tonsillectomy is considered for patients who are poor candidates for needle aspiration or incision and drainage (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Flores, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s585">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">If the patient requires intubation, cricothyroidotomy, or tracheotomy to treat airway obstruction, the nurse assists with the procedure and provides support to the patient before, during, and after the procedure. The nurse also assists with the needle aspiration when indicated.</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse encourages the patient to use prescribed topical anesthetic agents and assists with throat irrigations or the frequent use of mouthwashes or gargles, using saline or alkaline solutions at a temperature of 40.6&#x00B0; to 43.3&#x00B0;C (105&#x00B0; to 110&#x00B0;F). Gentle gargling after the procedure with a cool normal saline gargle may relieve discomfort. The patient must be upright and clearly expectorate forward. The nurse instructs the patient to gargle <em>gently</em> at intervals of 1 or 2 hours for 24 to 36 hours. Liquids that are cool or at room temperature are usually well tolerated. Adequate fluids must be provided to treat dehydration and prevent its recurrence.</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse also observes the patient for complications and instructs the patient about signs and symptoms of complications that require prompt attention by the patient&#x2019;s primary provider. At discharge, the nurse provides verbal and written instructions regarding foods to avoid, when to return to work, and the need to refrain from or cease smoking. The need for continuation of good oral hygiene is also reinforced.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>