<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s540">UPPER AIRWAY INFECTIONS</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Upper airway infections (otherwise known as upper respiratory infections [URIs]) are the most common cause of illness and affect most people on occasion. Some infections are acute, with symptoms that last several days; others are chronic, with symptoms that may last for weeks or months or recur. A URI is often defined as an infection of the mucous membranes of the nose, sinuses, pharynx, upper trachea, or larynx (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Pokorski, 2015</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The common cold is the most frequently occurring example of a URI. URIs occur when microorganisms such as viruses and bacteria are inhaled. There are many causative organisms, and people are susceptible throughout life. Viruses, the most common cause of URIs, affect the upper respiratory passages and lead to subsequent mucous membrane inflammation. URIs are the most common reason for seeking health care and for absences from school and work (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Pokorski, 2015</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">URIs affect the nasal cavity; ethmoidal air cells; and frontal, maxillary, and sphenoid sinuses; as well as the pharynx, larynx, and upper portion of the trachea. On average, adults typically develop two to four URIs per year because of the wide variety of respiratory viruses that circulate in the community (<a href="c18-sec14.xhtml#bib1440">Weinberger, Cockrill, &#x0026; Mandel, 2019</a>). Although patients are rarely hospitalized for the treatment of URIs, nurses working in community settings or long-term care facilities may encounter patients who have these infections. It is important for nurses to recognize the signs and symptoms of URIs and provide appropriate care. Nurses in these settings also can influence patient outcomes through patient education. Special considerations with regard to URIs in older adults are summarized in <a href="c18-sec02.xhtml#ct18-1">Chart&#x00A0;18-1</a>.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>