<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s664">Pleurisy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Pleurisy (pleuritis) refers to inflammation of both layers of the pleurae (parietal and visceral). Pleurisy may develop in conjunction with pneumonia or an upper respiratory tract infection, TB, or collagen disease; after trauma to the chest, pulmonary infarction, or PE; in patients with primary or metastatic cancer; and after thoracotomy. The parietal pleura has nerve endings, and the visceral pleura does not. When the inflamed pleural membranes rub together during respiration (intensified on inspiration), the result is severe, sharp, knifelike pain.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s665">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The key characteristic of pleuritic pain is its relationship to respiratory movement. Taking a deep breath, coughing, or sneezing worsens the pain. Pleuritic pain is limited in distribution rather than diffuse; it usually occurs only on one side. The pain may become minimal or absent when the breath is held. It may be localized or radiate to the shoulder or abdomen. Later, as pleural fluid develops, the pain decreases (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Weinberger et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s666">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In the early period, when little fluid has accumulated, a pleural friction rub can be heard with the stethoscope, only to disappear later as more fluid accumulates and separates the inflamed pleural surfaces. Diagnostic tests may include chest x-rays, sputum analysis, thoracentesis to obtain a specimen of pleural fluid for examination, and, less commonly, a pleural biopsy.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 553</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page554" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="554">p. 554</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s667">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The objectives of treatment are to discover the underlying condition causing the pleurisy and to relieve the pain. As the underlying disease (pneumonia, infection) is treated, the pleuritic inflammation usually resolves. At the same time, the patient must be monitored for signs and symptoms of pleural effusion, such as shortness of breath, pain, assumption of a position that decreases pain, and decreased chest wall excursion.</p>
<p class="indent">Prescribed analgesic agents and topical applications of heat or cold provide symptomatic relief. A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug may provide pain relief while allowing the patient to take deep breaths and cough more effectively. If the pain is severe, an intercostal nerve block may be required (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Weinberger et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s668">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because the patient has pain on inspiration, the nurse offers suggestions to enhance comfort, such as turning frequently onto the affected side to splint the chest wall and reduce the stretching of the pleurae. The nurse also educates the patient to use the hands or a pillow to splint the rib cage while coughing.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>