<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s623">Acute Tracheobronchitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Acute tracheobronchitis, an acute inflammation of the mucous membranes of the trachea and the bronchial tree, often follows infection of the upper respiratory tract usually as a result of a viral infection (see <a href="c18.xhtml">Chapter 18</a>). Patients with viral infections have decreased resistance and can readily develop a secondary bacterial infection. Adequate treatment of upper respiratory tract infection is one of the major factors in the prevention of acute tracheobronchitis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s624">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In acute tracheobronchitis, the inflamed mucosa of the bronchi produces mucopurulent sputum, often in response to infection by <em>Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae,</em> or <em>Mycoplasma pneumoniae.</em> A fungal infection (e.g., <em>Aspergillus</em>) may also cause tracheobronchitis. A sputum culture is essential to identify the specific causative organism. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page531" title="531"></span>In addition to infection, inhalation of physical and chemical irritants, gases, or other air contaminants can also cause acute bronchial irritation (File, 2019a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s625">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Initially, the patient has a dry, irritating cough and expectorates a scanty amount of mucoid sputum. The patient may report sternal soreness from coughing and have fever or chills, night sweats, headache, and general malaise. As the infection progresses, the patient may be short of breath, have noisy inspiration and expiration (inspiratory stridor and expiratory wheeze), and produce <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;purulent:&lt;/b&gt; consisting of, containing, or discharging pus">purulent</button></strong> (pus-filled) sputum. In severe tracheobronchitis, blood-streaked secretions may be expectorated as a result of the irritation of the mucosa of the airways.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s626">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Antibiotic treatment for an infection may be indicated depending on the symptoms, sputum purulence, and results of the sputum culture and sensitivity. Antihistamines usually are not prescribed, because they can cause excessive drying and make secretions more difficult to expectorate. Fluid intake is increased to thin viscous and tenacious secretions. Copious, purulent secretions that cannot be cleared by coughing place patients at risk for increasing airway obstruction and the development of more severe lower respiratory tract infections, such as pneumonia. Suctioning and bronchoscopy may be needed to remove secretions. Rarely, ET intubation may be necessary in cases of acute tracheobronchitis leading to acute respiratory failure, such as in patients who are severely debilitated or who have coexisting diseases that impair the respiratory system.</p>
<p class="indent">In most cases, treatment of tracheobronchitis is largely symptomatic. Increasing the vapor pressure (moisture content) in the air reduces airway irritation. Cool vapor therapy or steam inhalations may help relieve laryngeal and tracheal irritation. Moist heat to the chest may relieve the soreness and pain, and mild analgesics may be prescribed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s627">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Acute tracheobronchitis is usually treated in the home setting. A primary nursing function is to encourage bronchial hygiene, such as increased fluid intake and directed coughing to remove secretions. The nurse encourages and assists the patient to sit up frequently to cough effectively and to prevent retention of mucopurulent sputum. If the patient is taking antibiotics for an underlying bacterial infection, the need to complete the full course of antibiotics prescribed is emphasized. Fatigue is a consequence of tracheobronchitis; therefore, the nurse cautions the patient against overexertion, which can induce a relapse or exacerbation of the infection. The patient is advised to rest (File, 2019a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>