<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s703">OCCUPATIONAL LUNG DISEASE: PNEUMOCONIOSES</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Pneumoconiosis is a general term given to any lung disease caused by dusts that are breathed in and then deposited deep in the lungs causing damage. Pneumoconiosis is usually considered an occupational lung disease, and includes asbestosis, silicosis and coal workers&#x2019; pneumoconiosis, also known as &#x201C;Black Lung Disease&#x201D; (American Lung Association [ALA], 2018a) (see <a href="#tt19-6">Table&#x00A0;19-6</a>). Pneumoconiosis refers to a non-neoplastic <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page577" title="577"></span>alteration of the lung resulting from inhalation of mineral or inorganic dust (e.g., &#x201C;dusty lung&#x201D;). This alteration results in pulmonary fibrosis and parenchymal changes. Usually, extended exposure to irritating or toxic substances accounts for these changes, although severe single exposures may also lead to chronic lung disease. Occupational lung disease is the number one work-related illness in the United States based on its frequency, severity, and preventability (ALA, 2018a). Many people with early pneumoconiosis are asymptomatic, but advanced disease often is accompanied by disability and premature death.</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt19-6">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;19-6</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Occupational Lung Diseases: Pneumoconioses</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Disease (Source)</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Pathophysiology</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Clinical Manifestations</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Silicosis (glass manufacturing, foundry work, stone cutting)</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhaled silica dust produces nodular lesions in the lungs. Nodules enlarge and coalesce. Dense masses form on upper portion of lungs, resulting in loss of pulmonary volume. Fibrotic destruction of pulmonary tissue can lead to restrictive lung disease, emphysema, pulmonary hypertension, and cor pulmonale</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Acute silicosis:</em> dyspnea, fever, cough, weight loss</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Chronic silicosis:</em> progressive symptoms indicative of hypoxemia, severe airflow obstruction, and right-sided heart failure</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Asbestosis (shipbuilding, building demolition)</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Inhaled asbestos fibers enter alveoli and are surrounded by fibrous tissue. Fibrous changes can also affect the pleura, which thicken and develop plaque. These changes lead to restrictive lung disease, with a decrease in lung volume, diminished exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, hypoxemia, cor pulmonale, and respiratory failure. It also increases risk of lung cancer, mesothelioma, and pleural effusion</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Progressive dyspnea; persistent, dry cough; mild-to-moderate chest pain; anorexia; weight loss; malaise; clubbing of the fingers</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Coal worker&#x2019;s pneumoconiosis</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Encompasses a variety of lung diseases; is also known as black lung disease. Inhaled dusts that are mixtures of coal, kaolin, mica, and silica are deposited in the alveoli and respiratory bronchioles. When macrophages that engulf the dust can no longer be cleared, they aggregate and fibroblasts appear. The bronchioles and alveoli become clogged with dust, dying macrophages, and fibroblasts, leading to formation of coal macules. Fibrotic lesions develop and subsequently localized emphysema develops, with cor pulmonale and respiratory failure</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Chronic cough, dyspnea, and expectoration of black or gray sputum, especially in coal workers who smoke and who have cavitation in the lungs</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from American Lung Association (ALA). (2018a). Lung health &#x0026; diseases: Pneumoconiosis. Retrieved on 10/4/2019 at: <a href="http://www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/pneumoconiosis">www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/pneumoconiosis</a></p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Diseases of the lungs occur in numerous occupations as a result of exposure to several different types of agents, such as mineral dusts, metal dusts, biologic dusts, and toxic fumes. Smoking may compound the problem and may increase the risk of lung cancers in people exposed to the mineral asbestos and other potential carcinogens (ALA, 2018b). The effects of inhaling these materials depend on the composition of the substance, its concentration, its ability to initiate an immune response, its irritating properties, the duration of exposure, and the person&#x2019;s response or susceptibility to the irritant.</p>
<p class="indent">These diseases are not curable; however, they are preventable. Therefore, a major role for nurses, especially occupational health nurses, is that of advocate for employees. Nurses need to make every effort to promote measures to reduce the exposure of workers to industrial products. Strategies to control exposure should be identified and encouraged; these strategies include the use of protective devices (facemasks, hoods, industrial respirators) to minimize exposure and screening/monitoring of individuals at risk.</p>
<p class="indent">Key aspects of any assessment of patients with a potential occupational respiratory history include job and job activities, exposure levels, general hygiene, time frame of exposure, smoking history, effectiveness of respiratory protection used, and direct versus indirect exposures (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Goldman, 2019</a>). Specific information that should be obtained includes the following:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Exposure to an agent known to cause an occupational disorder</span></li>
<li><span>Length of time from exposure of agent to onset of symptoms</span></li>
<li><span>Congruence of symptoms with those of known exposure-related disorder</span></li>
<li><span>Lack of other more likely explanations of the signs and symptoms</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">More than one million workers are exposed to silica each year. Symptoms rarely develop in less than 5 years. Progression of the disease results in extreme shortness of breath, loss of appetite, chest pains, and potentially respiratory failure (ALA, 2018a). Asbestosis is progressive and causes severe scarring of the lung, which leads to fibrosis. The lungs become stiff, making it difficult to breathe or to oxygenate well. The disease may not evidence manifestations until 10 to 40 years after exposure (ALA, 2018a). Coal worker&#x2019;s pneumoconiosis is a collection of lung disease caused by exposure to inhaled dusts.</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse provides education about preventive measures to patients and their families, assesses patients for a history of exposure to environmental agents, and makes referrals so that pulmonary function can be evaluated and the patient can be treated early in the course of the disease. These diseases have no effective treatment because damage is irreversible. Supportive therapy is aimed at preventing infections and managing complications.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>