<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s657">Sarcoidosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Sarcoidosis is a type of interstitial lung disease that is also an inflammatory, multisystem, granulomatous disease of unknown etiology (King, 2019a). Although 90% of patients <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page553" title="553"></span>demonstrate thoracic involvement, any organ may be affected. Sarcoidosis usually presents between 20 and 40 years of age and is slightly more common in women than in men (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Weinberger et al., 2019</a>). In the United States, the disease is more common in African Americans, and the estimated prevalence is 10 to 20 per 100,000 people (King, 2019a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s658">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Sarcoidosis is thought to be a hypersensitivity response to one or more exogenous agents (bacteria, fungi, virus, chemicals) in people with an inherited or acquired predisposition to the disorder. The hypersensitivity response and inflammation result in the formation of a noncaseating granuloma, which is a noninfectious organized collection of macrophages that appear as a nodule. In the lung, granuloma infiltration and fibrosis may occur, resulting in low lung compliance, impaired diffusing capacity, and reduced lung volumes (King, 2019a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s659">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hallmarks of sarcoidosis are its insidious onset and lack of prominent clinical signs or symptoms. The clinical picture depends on the systems affected. The lung is most commonly involved; signs and symptoms may include dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, and congestion. Other signs include uveitis; joint pain; fever; and granulomatous lesions of the skin, liver, spleen, kidney, and central nervous system. With multisystem involvement, patients may also have fatigue, fever, anorexia, and weight loss. The granulomas may disappear or gradually convert to fibrous tissue.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s660">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chest x-rays and CT scans are used to assess pulmonary adenopathy. These may show hilar adenopathy and disseminated miliary and nodular lesions in the lungs. A mediastinoscopy or <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;transbronchial:&lt;/b&gt; through the bronchial wall, as in a transbronchial lung biopsy">transbronchial</button></strong> biopsy (in which a tissue specimen is obtained through the bronchial wall) may be used to confirm the diagnosis. In rare cases, an open lung biopsy is performed. Diagnosis is confirmed by a biopsy that shows noncaseating granulomas. Pulmonary function test results are abnormal if there is restriction of lung function (reduction in total lung capacity). Arterial blood gas measurements may be normal or may show hypoxemia (reduced oxygen levels) and hypercapnia (increased carbon dioxide levels).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s661">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many patients undergo remission without specific treatment. Corticosteroids may be beneficial because of their anti-inflammatory effects. Oral corticosteroids have been the most commonly used agents for the relief of symptoms and control of potentially disabling respiratory impairment from pulmonary sarcoidosis. Once begun, corticosteroid therapy is usually continued in tapering doses for 12 months, and longer if the patient has recurrence of symptoms and chest x-ray indications (i.e., continued pulmonary adenopathy) (King, 2019b). Corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone) have been shown to be useful in patients with ocular and myocardial involvement, skin involvement, extensive pulmonary disease that compromises pulmonary function, hepatic involvement, and hypercalcemia. However, it is not known if corticosteroids alter the long-term course of the disease (King, 2019b). When there is inadequate response to prednisone or the dose cannot be decreased, an immune modulator may be added (e.g., methotrexate, azathioprine, leflunomide, mycophenolate). No single test monitors the progression or recurrence of sarcoidosis; multiple tests are used to monitor involved systems.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s662">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The role of the nurse in the care of patients with sarcoidosis includes supporting the medical regimen and providing education and psychosocial support. Since treatment is aimed at reducing inflammation, patients should be educated on the effects and correct usage of corticosteroids. Patients should be instructed to notify their primary provider if symptoms do not improve or respiratory symptoms worsen. Sarcoidosis is a chronic illness warranting follow-ups at 3 to 6 month intervals to assess disease progression. Patients should be encouraged to contact the Foundation for Sarcoidosis Research to identify additional community resources that can be of assistance to them (see Resources section at the end of the chapter).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>