<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s675">Empyema</h4>
<p class="nonindent">An empyema is an accumulation of thick, purulent fluid within the pleural space, often with fibrin development and a loculated (walled-off) area where infection is located (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Strange, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s676">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Most empyemas occur as complications of bacterial pneumonia or lung abscess. They also result from penetrating chest trauma, hematogenous infection of the pleural space, nonbacterial infections, and iatrogenic causes (after thoracic surgery or thoracentesis). At first the pleural fluid is thin, with a low leukocyte count, but it frequently progresses to a fibropurulent stage and, finally, to a stage where it encloses the lung within a thick exudative membrane (loculated empyema).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s677">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is acutely ill and has signs and symptoms similar to those of an acute respiratory infection or pneumonia (fever, night sweats, pleural pain, cough, dyspnea, anorexia, weight loss). If the patient is immunocompromised, the symptoms may be vague. If the patient has received antimicrobial therapy, the clinical manifestations may be less obvious.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s678">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chest auscultation demonstrates decreased or absent breath sounds over the affected area, and there is dullness on chest percussion as well as decreased fremitus. The diagnosis is established by chest CT. Usually, a diagnostic thoracentesis is performed, often under ultrasound guidance.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s679">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The objectives of treatment are to drain the pleural cavity and to achieve complete expansion of the lung. The fluid is drained, and appropriate antibiotics (usually begun by the IV route) in large doses are prescribed based on the causative organism. Sterilization of the empyema cavity requires 4 to 6 weeks of antibiotics (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Strange, 2019</a>). Drainage of the pleural fluid depends on the stage of the disease and is accomplished by one of the following methods:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Thoracentesis (needle aspiration) with a thin percutaneous catheter, if the volume is small and the fluid is not too purulent or too thick</span></li>
<li><span>Tube thoracostomy (chest drainage using a large-diameter intercostal tube attached to water-seal drainage; see later discussion) with thrombolytic agents instilled through the chest tube in patients with loculated or complicated pleural effusions</span></li>
<li><span>Open chest drainage via thoracotomy, including potential rib resection, to remove the thickened pleura, pus, and debris and to remove the underlying diseased pulmonary tissue</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">With long-standing inflammation, an exudate can form over the lung, trapping it and interfering with its normal expansion. This exudate must be removed surgically by decortication. The drainage tube is left in place until the pus-filled space is obliterated completely. The complete obliteration of the pleural space is monitored by serial chest x-rays, and the patient should be informed that treatment may be long term (weeks to months). Patients are frequently discharged from the hospital with a chest tube in place, with instructions to monitor fluid drainage at home.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 555</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page556" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="556">p. 556</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s680">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Resolution of empyema is a prolonged process. The nurse helps the patient cope with the condition and instructs the patient in lung-expanding breathing exercises to restore normal respiratory function. The nurse also provides care specific to the method of drainage of the pleural fluid (e.g., needle aspiration, closed chest drainage, rib resection, and drainage). When the patient is discharged home with a drainage tube or system in place, the nurse instructs the patient and family on care of the drainage system and drain site, measurement and observation of drainage, signs and symptoms of infection, and how and when to contact the primary provider (see later discussion).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>