<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s695">Pulmonary Hypertension</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is characterized by elevated pulmonary arterial pressure greater than 25 mm Hg at rest and greater than 30 mm Hg with exercise and secondary right heart ventricular failure (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Rubin &#x0026; Hopkins, 2019</a>). It may be suspected in a patient with dyspnea with exertion without other clinical manifestations. Unlike systemic blood pressure, the pulmonary pressures cannot be measured indirectly. In the absence of these measurements, clinical recognition becomes the only indicator of PH. However, PH is a condition that is often not clinically evident until late in its progression. Patients are classified by the World Health Organization (WHO) into five groups based upon the mechanism of PH (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Rubin &#x0026; Hopkins, 2019</a>) (see <a href="#ct19-21">Chart&#x00A0;19-21</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s696">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Conditions such as collagen vascular disease, congenital heart disease, anorexigens (specific appetite depressants), chronic use of stimulants, portal hypertension, and HIV infection increase the risk of PH in susceptible patients. Vascular injury occurs with endothelial dysfunction and vascular smooth muscle dysfunction, which leads to disease progression (vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy, adventitial and intimal proliferation [thickening of the wall], and advanced vascular lesion formation). Normally, the pulmonary vascular bed can handle the blood volume delivered by the right ventricle. It has a low resistance to blood flow and compensates for increased blood volume by dilation of the vessels in the pulmonary circulation. However, if the pulmonary vascular bed is destroyed or obstructed, as in PH, the ability to handle whatever flow or volume of blood it receives is impaired, and the increased blood flow then increases the pulmonary artery pressure. As the pulmonary arterial pressure increases, the pulmonary vascular resistance also increases. Both pulmonary artery constriction (as in hypoxemia or hypercapnia) and a reduction of the pulmonary vascular bed (which occurs with PE) result in increased pulmonary vascular resistance and pressure. This increased workload affects right ventricular function. The myocardium ultimately cannot meet the increasing demands imposed on it, leading to right ventricular hypertrophy (enlargement and dilation) and failure. Passive hepatic congestion may also develop.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct19-21"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;19-21</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Clinical Classification of Pulmonary Hypertension (PH)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Group 1: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sporadic idiopathic PAH</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Heritable idiopathic PAH</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Drug and toxin-induced PAH</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>PAH due to diseases such as connective tissues disorders, HIV infection, portal hypertension, congenital heart disease</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Group 2: PH due to left heart disease</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Systolic dysfunction</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Diastolic dysfunction</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Valvular heart disease</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Group 3: PH due to chronic lung diseases and/or hypoxemia</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Interstitial lung disease</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Mixed restrictive and obstructive lung disease</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sleep disordered breathing</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Group 4: Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH)</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Due to thromboembolic occlusion of the proximal or distal pulmonary vasculature</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Group 5: PH with unclear multifactorial mechanisms</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hematologic disorders</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Systemic disorders (e.g., sarcoidosis)</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Metabolic disorders</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Rubin, L., &#x0026; Hopkins, W. (2019). Overview of pulmonary hypertension in adults. <em>UpToDate</em><em>.</em> Retrieved on 8/22/2019 at: <a href="http://www.uptodate.com/contents/overview-of-pulmonary-hypertension-in-adults">www.uptodate.com/contents/overview-of-pulmonary-hypertension-in-adults</a></p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s697">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Dyspnea, the main symptom of PH, occurs at first with exertion and eventually at rest. Substernal chest pain also is common. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page575" title="575"></span>Other signs and symptoms include weakness, fatigue, syncope, occasional hemoptysis, and signs of right-sided heart failure (peripheral edema, ascites, distended neck veins, liver engorgement, crackles, heart murmur). Anorexia and abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant may also occur.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s698">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnostic testing is used to confirm that PH exists, determine its severity, and identify its causes. Initial diagnostic evaluation includes a history, physical examination, chest x-ray, pulmonary function studies, electrocardiogram (ECG), and echocardiogram. Echocardiography can be used to estimate the pulmonary artery systolic pressure and to assess right ventricular size, thickness, and function. It can also evaluate the right atrial size, left ventricular system, and diastolic function as well as valve function. Right heart catheterization is necessary to confirm the diagnosis of PH and to accurately assess the hemodynamic abnormalities. PH is confirmed with a mean pulmonary artery pressure greater than 25 mm Hg. If left heart disease is identified via echocardiography and correlates with the degree of estimated PH, then exercise testing and both a right and left heart catheterization may be done to determine the functional severity of the disease and the abnormalities in pressures (left heart filling, pulmonary vascular resistance, transpulmonary gradient) (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Rubin &#x0026; Hopkins, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Pulmonary function studies may be normal or show a slight decrease in vital capacity and lung compliance, with a mild decrease in the diffusing capacity. The PaO<sub>2</sub> also is decreased (hypoxemia). The ECG reveals right ventricular hypertrophy, right axis deviation, and tall peaked P waves in inferior leads; tall anterior R waves; and ST-segment depression, T-wave inversion, or both anteriorly. An echocardiogram can assess the progression of the disease and rule out other conditions with similar signs and symptoms. A V./Q. scan or pulmonary angiography detects defects in pulmonary vasculature, such as PE.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s699">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The primary goal of treatment is to manage the underlying condition related to PH if the cause is known. Recommendations regarding therapy are tailored to the patient&#x2019;s individual situation, functional New York Heart Association class, and specific needs (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Rubin &#x0026; Hopkins, 2019</a>). All patients with PH should be considered for the following therapies: diuretics, oxygen, anticoagulation, digoxin, and exercise training. Diuretics and oxygen should be added as needed. Appropriate oxygen therapy reverses the vasoconstriction and reduces the PH in a relatively short time. Most patients with PH do not have hypoxemia at rest but require supplemental oxygen with exercise. Anticoagulation should be considered for patients at risk for intrapulmonary thrombosis. Digoxin may improve right ventricular ejection fraction in some patients and may help to control heart rate; however, patients must be monitored closely for potential complications (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Rubin &#x0026; Hopkins, 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Recent advances in pharmacologic management and medication delivery options have offered more effective treatment regimens for patients affected with PH. Medications prescribed to treat PH include calcium channel blockers and specific pathogenetic therapies, including prostanoids, endothelin receptor antagonists, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, and soluble guanylate cyclase stimulants. The choice of therapeutic agents is based on many facets, including the classification group status of the patient with PH (see <a href="#ct19-21">Chart&#x00A0;19-21</a>), as well as the cost and the patient&#x2019;s tolerance of the agents (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>). In addition, a vasoreactivity test may be done to identify which medication is best suited for the patient with PH; this is done during cardiac catheterization using vasodilating medications such as inhaled nitric oxide, adenosine, or prostacyclin. A positive vasoreactivity test occurs when there is a decrease of at least 10 mm Hg in the pulmonary artery pressure with an overall pressure that is less than 40 mm Hg in the presence of both an increased or unchanged cardiac output and a minimally decreased or unchanged systemic blood pressure (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with a positive vasoreactivity test and who do not have right-sided heart failure may be prescribed calcium channel blockers. Calcium channel blockers have a significant advantage over some medications taken to treat PH in that they may be taken orally and are generally less costly; however, because calcium channel blockers are indicated in only a small percentage of patients, other treatment options, including prostanoids, are often necessary (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Prostanoids mimic the effect of the prostaglandin prostacyclin. Prostacyclin relaxes vascular smooth muscle by stimulating the production of cyclic 3&#x2032;,5&#x2032;-adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and inhibits the growth of smooth muscle cells. Prostanoids used to treat PH include epoprostenol, iloprost, treprostinil, and selexipag. Limitations of the prostanoids include their short half-life and variable patient responses to therapy (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>). IV epoprostenol was the first FDA-approved prostanoid and is the most widely studied advanced therapy for PH. Epoprostenol has a half-life of less than 3 minutes and must be continuously delivered through a permanently implanted central venous catheter using a portable infusion pump in order to maintain therapeutic effectiveness. Although a useful therapy, it requires extensive patient education and caregiver support. An advantage to iloprostis over epoprostenol is that it is an inhaled preparation; however, it needs to be administered six to nine times daily. The first formulations of treprostinil could only be taken parenterally; however, it has recently been approved in an inhaled formulation, and an oral preparation is under development. Parenteral trepostinil can be administered IV or subcutaneously, although the subcutaneous method causes severe pain at the injection site (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>). Selexipag is the newest FDA-approved prostanoid. It is available in tablet form administered in twice-daily doses, a clear advantage over-the-other prostanoids. However, it is a costly medication and not all insurance plans cover all of its costs (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1527">Pulmonary Hypertension Association Scientific Leadership Council, 2016</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Endothelin receptor antagonists bind to vascular endothelin-1 receptors, effectively blocking constriction of the pulmonary arteries, resulting in vasodilation. Endothelin receptor antagonists used to treat PH include bosentan, ambrisentan, and macitentan. These medications are available as oral preparations. A disadvantage to them is that they are hepatotoxic. Liver function must be monitored in patients using these agents.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 575</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page576" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="576">p. 576</span></div>
<p class="indent">The oral medications sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil are potent, specific phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors that degrade cyclic 3&#x2032;,5&#x2032;-guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and promotes pulmonary vasodilation. These drugs are also prescribed to treat erectile dysfunction (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>; <a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1510">Korokina, Zhernakova, Korokin, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Soluble guanylate cyclase stimulants, which act on the nitrous oxide pathway, are currently undergoing clinical trials to target many cardiopulmonary diseases. Riociguat, a medication in this category, is newly FDA approved for use in PH. Riociguat, an oral preparation administered three times daily, is contraindicated in patients with liver or kidney disease (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1548">Tsai, Sung, &#x0026; de Jesus Perez, 2016</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Lung transplantation remains an option for a select group of patients with PH who are refractory to medical therapy. Bilateral lung or heart&#x2013;lung transplantation is the procedure of choice. Atrial septostomy may be considered for select patients with severe disease (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Hopkins &#x0026; Rubin, 2019</a>); this procedure results in shunting of blood from the right side of the heart to the left, decreasing the strain on the right side of the heart and maintaining left ventricular output.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s700">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The major nursing goal is to identify patients at high risk for PH, such as those with COPD, PE, congenital heart disease, and mitral valve disease so that early treatment can commence. The nurse must be alert for signs and symptoms, administer oxygen therapy appropriately, and instruct the patient and family about the use of home oxygen therapy. In patients treated with some of the prostanoids, education about the need for central venous access (epoprostenol), subcutaneous infusion (treprostinil), proper administration and dosing of the medication, pain at the injection site, and potential severe side effects is extremely important. Emotional and psychosocial aspects of this disease must be addressed. It is important to provide contact details for support services for patients and families.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s701">Pulmonary Heart Disease (Cor Pulmonale)</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;cor pulmonale:&lt;/b&gt; &#x201C;heart of the lungs&#x201D;; enlargement of the right ventricle from hypertrophy or dilation or as a secondary response to disorders that affect the lungs">Cor pulmonale</button></strong> is a condition that results from PH, which causes the right side of the heart to enlarge because of the increased work required to pump blood against high resistance through the pulmonary vascular system. This causes right-sided heart failure (see <a href="c25.xhtml">Chapter 25</a> for further discussion of management of right-sided heart failure).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>