<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s743">Penetrating Trauma</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Any organ or structure within the chest is potentially susceptible to traumatic penetration. These organs include the chest wall, lung and pleura, tracheobronchial system, esophagus, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page593" title="593"></span>diaphragm, and major thoracic blood vessels, as well as heart and other mediastinal structures. The clinical consequence of penetrating trauma to the chest depends on the mechanism of injury, location, associated injuries, and underlying illnesses (<a href="c19-sec28.xhtml#bib1564">Shahani, 2017</a>). Common injuries include pneumothorax and cardiac tamponade.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s744">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The objective of immediate management is to restore and maintain cardiopulmonary function. After an adequate airway is ensured and ventilation is established, examination for shock and intrathoracic and intra-abdominal injuries is necessary. The patient is undressed completely so that additional injuries are not missed (see <a href="c67.xhtml">Chapter 67</a> for discussion of primary and secondary survey). There is a high risk of associated intra-abdominal injuries with stab wounds below the level of the fifth anterior intercostal space. Death can result from exsanguinating hemorrhage or intra-abdominal sepsis.</p>
<p class="indent">The diagnostic workup includes a chest x-ray, chemistry profile, arterial blood gas analysis, pulse oximetry, and ECG. The patient&#x2019;s blood is typed and cross-matched in case blood transfusion is required. After the status of the peripheral pulses is assessed, a large-bore IV line is inserted. An indwelling catheter is inserted to monitor urinary output. A nasogastric tube is inserted and connected to low suction to prevent aspiration, minimize leakage of abdominal contents, and decompress the gastrointestinal tract.</p>
<p class="indent">Hemorrhagic shock is treated simultaneously with colloid solutions, crystalloids, or blood, as indicated by the patient&#x2019;s condition. Diagnostic procedures are carried out as dictated by the needs of the patient (e.g., CT scans of chest or abdomen, flat plate x-ray of the abdomen) (see <a href="c11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">A chest tube is inserted into the pleural space in most patients with penetrating wounds of the chest to achieve rapid and continuing re-expansion of the lungs. The insertion of the chest tube frequently results in a complete evacuation of the blood and air. The chest tube also allows early recognition of continuing intrathoracic bleeding, which would make surgical exploration necessary. If the patient has a penetrating wound of the heart or great vessels, the esophagus, or the tracheobronchial tree, surgical intervention is required.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>