<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s759">Bronchiectasis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;bronchiectasis:&lt;/b&gt; chronic, irreversible dilation of the bronchi and bronchioles that results from the destruction of muscles and elastic connective tissue; dilated airways become saccular and are a medium for chronic infection">Bronchiectasis</button></strong> is a chronic, irreversible dilation of the bronchi and bronchioles that results from destruction of muscles and elastic connective tissue. Numerous factors can induce or contribute to the development of bronchiectasis. Some of these include recurrent respiratory infections, CF, rheumatic and other systemic diseases, primary ciliary dysfunction, tuberculosis, or immune deficiency disorders (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1635">Barker, King, &#x0026; Hollingsworth, 2019</a>). Between 340,000 and 522,000 adults were living with non-CF bronchiectasis in 2013, estimates show (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1635">Weycker, Hansen, &#x0026; Seifer, 2017</a>). The increased prevalence of bronchiectasis, with an annual growth rate of 8% since 2001, may be attributed to advances in the technology for diagnosing the disease (GOLD, 2019). Bronchiectasis, a disease process separate from COPD, is often a comorbidity with COPD (GOLD, 2019). Bronchiectasis and sinusitis are the major respiratory manifestations of CF (discussed later in this chapter) (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1573">Barker et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s760">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The inflammatory process associated with pulmonary infections damages the bronchial wall, causing a loss of its supporting structure and resulting in thick sputum that ultimately obstructs the bronchi. The walls become permanently distended and distorted, impairing mucociliary clearance. In saccular bronchiectasis, each dilated peribronchial tube amounts to a lung abscess, the exudate of which drains freely through the bronchus. Bronchiectasis is usually localized, affecting a segment or lobe of a lung, most frequently the lower lobes.</p>
<p class="indent">The retention of secretions and subsequent obstruction ultimately cause the alveoli distal to the obstruction to collapse (atelectasis). Inflammatory scarring or fibrosis replaces functioning lung tissue. In time, the patient develops respiratory insufficiency with reduced vital capacity, decreased ventilation, and an increased ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity. There is impairment in the match of ventilation to perfusion (ventilation&#x2013;perfusion imbalance) and hypoxemia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s761">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Characteristic symptoms of bronchiectasis include chronic cough and the production of purulent sputum in copious amounts. Many patients with this disease have hemoptysis. Clubbing of the fingers is also common because of respiratory insufficiency. Patients usually have repeated episodes of pulmonary infection.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s762">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bronchiectasis is not readily diagnosed because the symptoms can be mistaken for those of chronic bronchitis. A definite sign is a prolonged history of productive, chronic cough, with sputum consistently negative for tubercle bacilli. The diagnosis is established by a CT scan, which reveals bronchial dilation. The advent of high-resolution CT scanning makes it possible to diagnose this disease during its earlier stages.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s763">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment objectives are to promote bronchial drainage, to clear excessive secretions from the affected portion of the lungs, and to prevent or control infection and inflammation. Chest physiotherapy (CPT; see previous discussion) is essential for promoting airway drainage. Sometimes, mucopurulent sputum must be removed by bronchoscopy. Smoking cessation <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page632" title="632"></span>is important, because smoking impairs bronchial drainage by paralyzing ciliary action, increasing bronchial secretions, and causing inflammation of the mucous membranes, resulting in hyperplasia of the mucous glands.</p>
<p class="indent">Antibiotics are the cornerstone therapy for management of a bronchiectatic exacerbation. Antimicrobial therapy choice is based on the results of sensitivity studies on organisms cultured from sputum; however, empiric coverage (i.e., broad-spectrum antibiotics that are effective in treating commonly implicated pathogens) is often prescribed initially, pending results of sputum cultures. The most commonly implicated pathogens include <em>H. influenzae, M. catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus,</em> and <em>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</em> (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1574">Barker, Stoller, King, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). Because infection with <em>P. aeruginosa</em> is associated with a greater rate of lung function deterioration, more aggressive oral or IV antibiotic therapy may be used for a longer duration. For patients with recurrent exacerbations (usually two or more during the past year), a low dose macrolide antibiotic may be used as preventative, ongoing therapy (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1574">Barker et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). In addition, patients should be vaccinated against influenza and pneumococcal pneumonia.</p>
<p class="indent">Secretion management is an issue for patients with bronchiectasis. Nebulized mucolytics may help to clear airway secretions. These drugs promote expectoration by breaking down the mucus blocking the airways. The administration of nebulized hypertonic saline also improves airway clearance by decreasing the viscosity of the mucus and improving the ability of secretions to move out of the airways. Bronchodilators might be prescribed to help open up the airways, thus enhancing the ability of the other medications (e.g., mucolytics, hypertonic saline) to mobilize secretions. These agents also allow a better passageway for the secretions to move through. Bronchodilators are typically administered at the beginning of each pulmonary treatment. Ensuring adequate hydration and employing CPT may also be of help in loosening and thinning secretions (<a href="c20-sec05.xhtml#bib1574">Barker et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Surgical intervention, although used infrequently, may be indicated for patients who continue to expectorate large amounts of sputum and have repeated bouts of pneumonia and hemoptysis despite adherence to treatment regimens. The disease must involve only one or two areas of the lung that can be removed without producing respiratory insufficiency. The goals of surgical treatment are to conserve normal pulmonary tissue and to avoid infectious complications. Diseased tissue is removed, provided that postoperative lung function will be adequate. It may be necessary to remove a segment of a lobe (segmental resection), a lobe (lobectomy), or, rarely, an entire lung (pneumonectomy). Segmental resection is the removal of an anatomic subdivision of a pulmonary lobe. In select cases, video-assisted surgery (VATS) segmentectomy or lobectomy may be performed, which is associated with fewer complications and decreased length of stay. The chief advantage is that only diseased tissue is removed, and healthy lung tissue is conserved.</p>
<p class="indent">The surgery is preceded by a period of careful preparation. The objective is to obtain a dry (free of infection) tracheobronchial tree to prevent complications (atelectasis, pneumonia, bronchopleural fistula, and empyema). This is accomplished by postural drainage or, depending on the location, by direct suction through a bronchoscope. A course of antibacterial therapy may be prescribed. After surgery, care is the same as for any patient who has undergone chest surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s764">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nursing management focuses on alleviating symptoms and helping patients clear pulmonary secretions. Patient education targets eliminating smoking and other factors that increase the production of mucus and hamper its removal. Patients and families are taught to perform postural drainage and to avoid exposure to people with upper respiratory or other infections. If the patient experiences fatigue and dyspnea, they are informed about strategies to conserve energy while maintaining as active a lifestyle as possible. The patient is educated about the early signs of respiratory infection and the progression of the disorder so that appropriate treatment can be implemented promptly. The presence of a large amount of mucus may decrease the patient&#x2019;s appetite and result in an inadequate dietary intake; therefore, the patient&#x2019;s nutritional status is assessed and strategies are implemented to ensure an adequate diet.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>