<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s806">Influences on Heart Rate and Contractility</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The heart rate is influenced by the autonomic nervous system, which consists of sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers. Sympathetic nerve fibers (also referred to as adrenergic fibers) are attached to the heart and arteries as well as several other areas in the body. Stimulation of the sympathetic system results in positive <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;chronotropy:&lt;/b&gt; rate of impulse formation">chronotropy</button></strong> (increased heart rate), positive <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dromotropy:&lt;/b&gt; conduction velocity">dromotropy</button></strong> (increased AV conduction), and positive <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;inotropy:&lt;/b&gt; force of myocardial contraction">inotropy</button></strong> (increased force of myocardial contraction). Sympathetic stimulation also constricts peripheral blood vessels, therefore increasing blood pressure. Parasympathetic nerve fibers are also attached to the heart and arteries. Parasympathetic stimulation reduces the heart rate (negative chronotropy), AV conduction (negative dromotropy), and the force of atrial myocardial contraction. The decreased sympathetic stimulation results in dilation of arteries, thereby lowering blood pressure.</p>
<p class="indent">Manipulation of the autonomic nervous system may increase or decrease the incidence of arrhythmias. Increased sympathetic stimulation (e.g., caused by exercise, anxiety, fever, or administration of catecholamines such as dopamine, aminophylline, or dobutamine) may increase the incidence of arrhythmias. Decreased sympathetic stimulation (e.g., with rest, anxiety reduction methods such as therapeutic communication or meditation, or administration of beta-adrenergic blocking agents) may decrease the incidence of arrhythmias.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>