<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s824">Electrophysiology Studies</h4>
<p class="nonindent">An EPS is an invasive procedure used to evaluate and treat various chronic arrhythmias that have caused cardiac arrest or significant symptoms. It also is indicated for patients with symptoms that suggest an arrhythmia that has gone undetected and undiagnosed by other methods. Because an EPS is invasive, it is performed in the hospital and may require that the patient be admitted. An EPS is used to do the following:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Identify the impulse formation and propagation through the cardiac electrical conduction system</span></li>
<li><span>Assess the function or dysfunction of the SA and AV nodal areas</span></li>
<li><span>Identify the location (called <em>mapping</em>) and mechanism of the arrhythmogenic foci (the exact site where the arrhythmia originates)</span></li>
<li><span>Assess the effectiveness of antiarrhythmic medications and devices for the patient with an arrhythmia</span></li>
<li><span>Treat certain arrhythmias through the destruction of the causative cells (ablation)</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">An EPS procedure is a type of cardiac catheterization that is performed in a specially equipped cardiac catheterization laboratory by an electrophysiologist, assisted by other EPS laboratory personnel. The patient is conscious but lightly sedated. Usually, one or more catheters are inserted into the groin, neck, or antecubital fossa. The electrodes are positioned within the heart at specific locations&#x2014;for instance, in the right atrium near the sinus node, in the coronary sinus, near the tricuspid valve, and at the apex of the right ventricle. The number and placement of electrodes depend on the type of study being conducted. These electrodes allow the electrical signal to be recorded from within the heart (intracardiogram).</p>
<p class="indent">The electrodes also allow the electrophysiologist to introduce a pacing stimulus to the intracardiac area at a precisely timed interval and rate, thereby stimulating the area (programmed stimulation). An area of the heart may be paced at a rate much faster than the normal rate of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;automaticity:&lt;/b&gt; ability of the cardiac cells to initiate an electrical impulse">automaticity</button></strong>, the rate at which impulses are spontaneously formed (e.g., in the sinus node). This allows the pacemaker to become an artificial focus of automaticity and to assume control (overdrive suppression). Then, the pacemaker is stopped suddenly, and the time it takes for the sinus node to resume control is assessed. A prolonged time indicates dysfunction of the sinus node.</p>
<p class="indent">One of the main purposes of programmed stimulation is to assess the ability of the area surrounding the electrode to cause a reentry arrhythmia. One or a series of premature impulses is delivered to an area in an attempt to cause the tachyarrhythmia. Because the precise location of the suspected area and the specific timing of the pacing needed are unknown, the electrophysiologist uses many different techniques to cause the arrhythmia during the study. If the arrhythmia can be reproduced by programmed stimulation, it is called <em>inducible.</em> Once an arrhythmia is induced, a treatment plan is determined and implemented. If, on the follow-up EPS, the tachyarrhythmia cannot be induced, then the treatment is determined to be effective. Different medications may be given and combined with cardiac implantable electronic devices to determine the most effective treatment to suppress the arrhythmia.</p>
<p class="indent">Patient care, patient education, and associated complications of an EPS are similar to those associated with cardiac catheterization (see <a href="c21.xhtml">Chapter 21</a>). The study is usually about 2 hours in length; however, if the electrophysiologist conducts not only a diagnostic procedure but also treatment, the study can take up to 6 hours. During the procedure, patients benefit from a calm, reassuring approach.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients who are to undergo an EPS may be anxious about the procedure and its outcome. A detailed discussion involving the patient, the family, and the electrophysiologist usually occurs to ensure that the patient can give informed consent and to reduce the patient&#x2019;s anxiety about the procedure. Before the procedure, the nurse educates the patient about the EPS and its usual duration, the environment where the procedure is performed, and what to expect. Although an EPS is not painful, it does cause discomfort and can be tiring. It may also cause feelings that were experienced when the arrhythmia occurred in the past. In addition, patients are educated about what will be expected of them (e.g., lying very still during the procedure, reporting symptoms or concerns).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient should also know that the arrhythmia may occur during the procedure. It often stops on its own; if it does not, treatment is given to restore the patient&#x2019;s normal rhythm. The arrhythmia may have to be terminated using cardioversion or defibrillation, but this is performed under more controlled circumstances than if performed in an emergency.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 714</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page715" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="715">p. 715</span></div>
<p class="indent">Postprocedural care is similar to that for cardiac catheterization, including restriction of activity to promote hemostasis at the insertion site (see <a href="c21.xhtml">Chapter 21</a>). To identify any complications and to ensure healing, the patient&#x2019;s vital signs and the appearance of the insertion site are assessed frequently. Because an artery is not always used, there is a lower incidence of vascular complications than with other catheterization procedures (<a href="c22-sec12.xhtml#bib1693">Zipes, Libby, Bonow, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>