<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s820"><strong>ADJUNCT MODALITIES AND MANAGEMENT</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Arrhythmia treatments depend on whether the disorder is acute or chronic, as well as on the cause of the arrhythmia and its actual or potential hemodynamic effects.</p>
<p class="indent">Acute arrhythmias may be treated with medications or with external electrical therapy (emergency defibrillation, cardioversion, or pacing). Many antiarrhythmic medications are used to treat atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias (see <a href="c22-sec07.xhtml#tt22-1">Table&#x00A0;22-1</a>). The choice of medication depends on the specific arrhythmia and its duration, the presence of structural heart disease (e.g., heart failure), and the patient&#x2019;s response to previous treatment. The nurse is responsible for monitoring and documenting the patient&#x2019;s responses to the medication and for ensuring that the patient has the knowledge and ability to manage the medication regimen.</p>
<p class="indent">If medications alone are ineffective in eliminating or decreasing the arrhythmia, certain adjunct mechanical therapies are available. The most common therapies are elective cardioversion and defibrillation for acute tachyarrhythmia, and implantable electronic devices for bradycardias (pacemakers) and chronic tachyarrhythmias (ICDs). Surgical treatments, although less common, are also available. The nurse is responsible for assessing the patient&#x2019;s understanding of and response to mechanical therapy, as well as the patient&#x2019;s self-management abilities. The nurse explains that the purpose of the device is to help the patient lead a life that is as active and productive as possible.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>