<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s805">Normal Electrical Conduction</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The electrical impulse that stimulates and paces the cardiac muscle normally originates in the SA node, also called the <em>sinus node,</em> an area located near the superior vena cava in the right atrium. In the adult, the electrical impulse usually occurs at a rate of 60 to 100 times a minute. The electrical impulse quickly travels from the SA node through the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node (see <a href="c22-sec04.xhtml#ff22-1">Fig.&#x00A0;22-1</a>); this process is known as <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;conduction:&lt;/b&gt; transmission of electrical impulses from one cell to another">conduction</button></strong>. The electrical stimulation of the muscle cells of the atria causes them to contract. The structure of the AV node slows the electrical impulse, giving the atria time to contract and fill the ventricles with blood. This part of atrial contraction is frequently referred to as the atrial kick and accounts for nearly one third of the volume ejected during ventricular contraction (<a href="c22-sec12.xhtml#bib1692">Fuster, Harrington, Narula, et al., 2017</a>). The electrical impulse then travels very quickly through the bundle of His to the right and left bundle branches and the Purkinje fibers, located in the ventricular muscle.</p>
<p class="indent">The electrical stimulation is called <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;depolarization:&lt;/b&gt; electrical activation of a cell caused by the influx of sodium into the cell while potassium exits the cell">depolarization</button></strong>, and the mechanical contraction is called <em>systole.</em> Electrical relaxation is called <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;repolarization:&lt;/b&gt; return of the cell to resting state, caused by reentry of potassium into the cell while sodium exits the cell">repolarization</button></strong>, and mechanical relaxation is called <em>diastole.</em> The process from sinus node electrical impulse generation through ventricular repolarization completes the electromechanical circuit, and the cycle begins again. (See <a href="c21.xhtml">Chapter 21</a> for a more complete explanation of cardiac function.)</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>