<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s885">Aortic Stenosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Aortic valve stenosis is narrowing of the orifice between the left ventricle and aorta. In adults, stenosis is usually caused by degenerative calcification. Calcification may be caused by proliferative and inflammatory changes that occur in response to years of normal mechanical stress, similar to changes that occur in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1820">Joseph, Naqvi, Giri, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Congenital leaflet malformations or an abnormal number of leaflets (i.e., one or two rather than three) are less common causes. Rheumatic endocarditis may <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page770" title="770"></span>cause adhesions or fusion of the commissures and valve ring, stiffening of the cusps, and calcific nodules on the cusps.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s886">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Typically, aortic stenosis progresses gradually over several years to several decades. As the valve orifice narrows, the left ventricle overcomes obstruction by contracting more slowly and more forcibly. Obstruction to left ventricular outflow increases pressure on the left ventricle, so the ventricular wall hypertrophies. When these compensatory mechanisms are insufficient to allow for normal heart function, clinical signs and symptoms of heart failure will develop (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1820">Joseph et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s887">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many patients with aortic stenosis are asymptomatic. Often, the first symptom to appear is DOE, caused by increased pulmonary venous pressure due to a dilating left ventricle. Over time, left ventricular failure may occur, causing orthopnea, PND, and pulmonary edema. Reduced blood flow to the brain may cause dizziness, and in more severe aortic stenosis, syncope. Patients may also report angina pectoris, which is caused by limited blood flow into the coronary arteries, decreased time in diastole to allow for myocardial perfusion, and simultaneously increased oxygen demand of the hypertrophied left ventricle. Blood pressure is usually normal but may be low. In the setting of decreased blood flow, there may be a low pulse pressure (30 mm Hg or less).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s888">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">On physical examination, a loud, harsh systolic murmur is heard over the aortic area (i.e., right second intercostal space) and may radiate to the carotid arteries and apex of the left ventricle. The murmur may be described as low pitched, crescendo&#x2013;decrescendo, rough, rasping, and vibrating (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1797">Libby, Zipes, Bonow, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). An S<sub>4</sub> sound may be heard (see <a href="c21.xhtml">Chapter 21</a> for discussion of heart sounds). By having the patient lean forward during auscultation and palpation, especially during exhalation, the murmur may be accentuated. There may also be a palpable vibration extending from the base of the heart (second intercostal space next to the sternum and above the suprasternal notch) and up along the carotid arteries. The vibration is caused by turbulent blood flow across the narrowed valve orifice.</p>
<p class="indent">Cardiac imaging is used to diagnose and monitor the progression of aortic stenosis. This may consist of echocardiography, cardiac MRI, or computed tomography (CT) scanning (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1823">Lindman, Dweck, Lancellotti, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). Patients with symptoms usually have echocardiograms every 6 to 12 months, and those without symptoms have echocardiograms every 2 to 5 years, depending on how severely the orifice is narrowed (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1823">Lindman et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>; <a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1834">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2014</a>). Left ventricular hypertrophy may be seen on a 12-lead ECG or an echocardiogram. Once aortic stenosis has progressed sufficiently to consider surgical intervention, left-sided heart catheterization is needed to measure the severity of the valvular abnormality and to evaluate the coronary arteries. Pressure measurements are taken from the left ventricle and base of the aorta. The systolic pressure in the left ventricle is considerably higher than that in the aorta during systole. Graded exercise studies (stress tests) to assess exercise capacity are performed with caution for patients with severe aortic stenosis due to the high risk of inducing ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation, and should not be performed on symptomatic patients (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1820">Joseph et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s889">Prevention</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Prevention of aortic stenosis is primarily focused on controlling risk factors for proliferative and inflammatory responses&#x2014;namely, through treating diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and elevated triglycerides, and avoiding tobacco products and ENDS (see prevention of endocarditis later in this chapter).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s890">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medications are prescribed to treat arrhythmias or left ventricular failure (see Chapters 22 and 25). Definitive treatment for aortic stenosis is replacement of the aortic valve, which may be done surgically or nonsurgically. Nonsurgical valve replacement, known as transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), is described in more detail later in this chapter. Patients who are symptomatic and are not candidates for valve replacement may benefit from one- or two-balloon percutaneous valvuloplasty procedures, which can provide symptom relief (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1840">Sandhu, Krishnamoorthy, Afif, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>