<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s908">Rheumatic Endocarditis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Acute rheumatic fever, which occurs most often in school-age children, may develop after an episode of group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis (<a href="#ct24-5">Chart 24-5</a>). Patients with rheumatic fever may develop rheumatic heart disease as evidenced by a new heart murmur, cardiomegaly, pericarditis, and heart failure. Prompt and effective treatment of &#x201C;strep&#x201D; throat with antibiotics can prevent development of rheumatic fever. Streptococcus is spread by direct contact with oral or respiratory secretions. Although bacteria are the causative agents, malnutrition, overcrowding, poor hygiene, and lower socioeconomic status may predispose individuals to rheumatic fever. The incidence of rheumatic fever in developed countries has decreased and it is now primarily a disease of the developing world (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1805">Cannon, Roberts, Milne, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). As noted earlier in the chapter, rheumatic heart disease may lead to mitral valve stenosis or regurgitation that remains an issue in adulthood. Further information about rheumatic fever and rheumatic endocarditis can be found in pediatric nursing books.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 784</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page785" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="785">p. 785</span></div>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct24-5"><strong>Chart 24-5</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Rheumatic Fever</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">Rheumatic fever is a preventable disease. Diagnosing and effectively treating streptococcal pharyngitis can prevent rheumatic fever and, therefore, rheumatic heart disease. Signs and symptoms of streptococcal pharyngitis include:</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sore throat that can start very quickly</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pain when swallowing</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Fever</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Red and swollen tonsils, sometimes with white patches or streaks of pus</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Petechiae (tiny, red spots) on the roof of the mouth (the soft or hard palate)</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Swollen lymph nodes in the front of the neck</p>
<p class="BoxpPARApIndent">If signs and symptoms of streptococcal pharyngitis are present, a rapid strep test is necessary to make an accurate diagnosis. If the test is negative but strep throat is still suspected, then a throat culture can be done. For adults, it is usually not necessary to do a throat culture following a negative rapid strep test. Adults are generally not at risk for getting rheumatic fever following a strep throat infection. All patients with a positive rapid strep test or throat cultures positive for streptococcal pharyngitis must adhere to the prescribed antibiotic treatment. Penicillin or amoxicillin are typical first-line antibiotics used. Completing the course of prescribed antibiotics minimizes the risk of developing rheumatic fever (and subsequent rheumatic heart disease).</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2018). <em>Strep throat: All you need to know</em>. Retrieved on 12/3/2019 at: <a href="http://www.cdc.gov/groupastrep/diseases-public/strep-throat.html">www.cdc.gov/groupastrep/diseases-public/strep-throat.html</a></p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>