<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s862">Mitral Valve Prolapse</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Mitral valve prolapse is a deformity that usually produces no symptoms. Rarely, it progresses and can result in sudden death (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1813">Han, Ha, Teh, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>; <a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1832">Nalliah, Mahajan, Elliott, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). This condition occurs in up to 2.5% of the general <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page767" title="767"></span>population and twice as frequently in women as in men (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1813">Han et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). In most cases, there is no clear cause, but it has been associated with inherited connective tissue disorders, causing enlargement of one or both of the mitral valve leaflets (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Asher, Chen, &#x0026; Kallish, 2018</a>; <a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1849">Wozniak-Mielczarek, Sabiniewicz, Drezek-Nojowicz, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). The annulus often dilates; chordae tendineae and papillary muscles may elongate or rupture.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s863">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In mitral valve prolapse, a portion of one or both mitral valve leaflets balloons back into the atrium during systole. Rarely, ballooning stretches the leaflet to the point that the valve does not remain closed during systole. Blood then regurgitates from the left ventricle back into the left atrium. Although uncommon, mitral valve prolapse can result in mitral regurgitation, which can cause heart enlargement, atrial fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension, or heart failure (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1824">Ma, Igata, Strachan, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s864">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Most people with mitral valve prolapse never have symptoms. A small number of patients will have fatigue, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, dizziness, syncope, palpitations, chest pain, or anxiety. To date, there has been no consensus about the cause of symptoms. Patients may report fatigue, regardless of activity level and amount of rest or sleep, as well as shortness of breath, palpitations, and chest pain (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1801">Althunayyan, Petersen, Lloyd, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s865">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Often, the first and only sign of mitral valve prolapse is an extra heart sound, referred to as a mitral click. A systolic click is an early sign that a valve leaflet is ballooning into the left atrium. In addition to the mitral click, a murmur of mitral regurgitation may be heard if the valve opens during systole and blood flows back into the left atrium. If mitral regurgitation exists, a patient may experience signs and symptoms of heart failure (see <a href="c25.xhtml">Chapter 25</a>). Echocardiography is used to diagnose and monitor progression of mitral valve prolapse (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1813">Han et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s866">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical management is directed at controlling symptoms. If a patient who reports palpitations is found to have an arrhythmia, the patient may be advised to eliminate caffeine and alcohol from the diet and to stop the use of tobacco products as well as electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), including e-cigarettes, e-pens, e-pipes, e-hookah, and e-cigars. Most patients do not require medication, but some are prescribed antiarrhythmic medications (see <a href="c22-sec04.xhtml#ff22-1">Chapter 22, Table 22-1</a>). Prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended prior to dental or invasive procedures (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura, Otto, Bonow, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients who have chest pain related to mitral valve prolapse rarely require medical therapies, such as nitrates, calcium channel blockers, or beta-blockers. Heart failure, if present, is treated as it would be for any other case of heart failure (see <a href="c25.xhtml">Chapter 25</a>). Patients with severe mitral regurgitation and symptomatic heart failure may require mitral valve repair or replacement (discussed later in this chapter).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s867">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse educates the patient about the diagnosis and the possibility that the condition is hereditary. First-degree relatives (e.g., parents, siblings) may be advised to have screening cardiac evaluations or echocardiograms. Because most patients with mitral valve prolapse are asymptomatic, the nurse explains the need to inform the patient&#x2019;s primary provider about any symptoms that may develop. The nurse encourages the patient to read product labels, particularly on over-the-counter products such as cough medicine, because these products may contain alcohol, caffeine, ephedrine, and epinephrine, which may produce arrhythmias and other symptoms. The nurse also explores diet, activity, sleep, and other lifestyle factors that may correlate with symptoms. (Treatment of arrhythmias, chest pain, heart failure, or other complications of mitral valve prolapse is described in Chapters 22 and 25.) Women diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse without mitral regurgitation or other complications may complete pregnancies without close cardiac monitoring and can safely proceed with vaginal deliveries (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Yuan &#x0026; Yan, 2016</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>