<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s868">Mitral Regurgitation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Mitral regurgitation is a condition in which blood flows from the left ventricle back into the left atrium during systole. Often, the edges of mitral valve leaflets do not close completely during systole because leaflets and chordae tendineae have thickened and become fibrotic, resulting in abnormal contraction. Mitral regurgitation may be chronic or, less commonly, acute. The most common causes of mitral valve regurgitation in developed countries are degenerative changes of the mitral valve (including mitral valve prolapse) and ischemia of the left ventricle (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Harb &#x0026; Griffin, 2017</a>). The most common cause in developing countries is rheumatic heart disease and its sequelae (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1833">Negi, Mahajan, Rana, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Other conditions that lead to chronic mitral regurgitation include pathologic myxomatous changes, which enlarge and stretch the left atrium and ventricle, causing leaflets and chordae tendineae to stretch or rupture (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Harb &#x0026; Griffin, 2017</a>). Infective endocarditis may cause acute mitral regurgitation through leaflet perforation, or scarring following an infection that may cause retraction of leaflets or chordae tendineae (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Watanabe, 2019</a>). Collagen vascular diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), cardiomyopathy, and ischemic heart disease may result in changes in the left ventricle, causing papillary muscles, chordae tendineae, or leaflets to stretch, shorten, or rupture. These conditions are often referred to as functional, or secondary, mitral regurgitation (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1809">Dziadzko, Dziadzko, Medina-Inojosa, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s869">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Mitral regurgitation may result from problems with one or more leaflets, chordae tendineae, the annulus, or the papillary muscles. A mitral valve leaflet may shorten or tear, and chordae tendineae may elongate, shorten, or tear. The annulus may be stretched by heart enlargement, as in functional mitral regurgitation, or it may be deformed by calcification. A <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page768" title="768"></span>papillary muscle may rupture, stretch, or be pulled out of position by changes in the ventricular wall (e.g., scar from a myocardial infarction, ventricular dilation). Papillary muscles may be unable to contract because of ischemia, a condition referred to as ischemic mitral regurgitation. Regardless of the cause, the effect is backward blood flow into the atrium during systole.</p>
<p class="indent">In this disorder, each beat of the left ventricle pushes blood backward into the left atrium, adding to blood flowing in from the lungs. This excess blood causes the left atrium to stretch and eventually thicken, or hypertrophy, then dilate. Over time, blood coming in from the ventricle prevents blood flow from the lungs into the atrium. As a result, the lungs become congested, eventually adding extra strain to the right ventricle. During diastole, the increased blood volume from the atrium fills the ventricle. The volume overload causes ventricular hypertrophy. Eventually, the ventricle dilates, and systolic heart failure develops.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s870">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chronic mitral regurgitation is often asymptomatic, but acute mitral regurgitation (e.g., resulting from a myocardial infarction) usually manifests as severe and sudden congestive heart failure (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Harb &#x0026; Griffin, 2017</a>). Dyspnea, fatigue, and weakness are the most common symptoms. Palpitations, shortness of breath on exertion, and cough from pulmonary congestion also occur.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s871">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The systolic murmur of mitral regurgitation is a blowing sound best heard at the apex. The murmur may radiate to the left axilla (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Harb &#x0026; Griffin, 2017</a>). The pulse may be regular, or it may be irregular because of extrasystolic beats or atrial fibrillation. Echocardiography is used to diagnose and monitor progression of this disorder (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s872">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with mitral regurgitation who develop pulmonary congestion are managed with medications used for heart failure. Patients with mitral regurgitation and heart failure benefit from afterload reduction (arterial dilation) by treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (e.g., captopril, lisinopril) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) (e.g., losartan, valsartan), direct arterial dilators (e.g., hydralazine), and beta-blockers (e.g., carvedilol, metoprolol) (see <a href="c25-sec01.xhtml#tt25-3">Chapter 25, Table 25-3</a>). Symptoms of heart failure also are an indication to consider surgical intervention by mitral <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;valvuloplasty:&lt;/b&gt; repair of a stenosed or regurgitant cardiac valve by commissurotomy, annuloplasty, or leaflet repair (or a combination of procedures)">valvuloplasty</button></strong> (i.e., surgical repair of the valve) or <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;valve replacement:&lt;/b&gt; insertion of either a mechanical prosthetic valve or a bioprosthetic, homograft, or autograft tissue valve at the site of a malfunctioning heart valve to restore normal blood flow through the heart">valve replacement</button></strong> (replacement of the dysfunctional valve with either a mechanical valve or a type of tissue valve; discussed later in this chapter) (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>