<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s879">Aortic Regurgitation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Aortic regurgitation is backward flow of blood into the left ventricle from the aorta during diastole. It may be caused by a congenital valve abnormality (e.g., a bicuspid aortic valve), inflammatory lesions that deform aortic valve leaflets, or dilation of the aorta, preventing complete closure of the aortic valve. Chronic or acute aortic regurgitation may also be caused by infections such as rheumatic endocarditis or syphilis, or by a dissecting aortic aneurysm resulting in dilation or tearing of the ascending aorta, blunt chest trauma, or deterioration of a surgically replaced aortic valve (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Akinseye, Pathak, &#x0026; Ibebuogu, 2018</a>; <a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s880">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">During diastole, blood is normally delivered into the left atrium from the aorta. In aortic regurgitation, blood flows back into the left ventricle, which will dilate to accommodate increased blood volume. Over time, the left ventricle hypertrophies to expel more blood with above-normal force, thus increasing systolic blood pressure. Arteries attempt to compensate for higher pressures by reflex vasodilation; peripheral arterioles relax, reducing peripheral resistance and diastolic blood pressure.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s881">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Aortic regurgitation, also called aortic insufficiency, develops without symptoms in most patients. Some patients are aware of a pounding or forceful heartbeat, especially in the head or neck. Patients who develop left ventricular hypertrophy may have visible or palpable arterial pulsations at the carotid or temporal arteries due to increased force and blood volume. As aortic regurgitation worsens, DOE and fatigue follow; there may eventually be signs and symptoms of progressive left ventricular failure including increased shortness of breath, orthopnea, or PND (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1800">Akinseye et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s882">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A high-pitched, blowing diastolic murmur is heard at the third or fourth intercostal space at the left sternal border. The difference between systolic and diastolic pressures (i.e., the pulse pressure) may be widened in patients with aortic regurgitation. One characteristic sign is the water hammer (Corrigan&#x2019;s) pulse, in which the pulse strikes a palpating finger with a quick, sharp stroke and then collapses (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Pabba &#x0026; Boudi, 2019</a>). The diagnosis may be confirmed by echocardiography (preferably transesophageal), cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or cardiac catheterization. Patients with symptoms usually have echocardiograms every 6 months, and those without symptoms have echocardiograms every 2 to 5 years (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s883">Prevention</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Prevention of aortic regurgitation is primarily based on prevention of and treatment for bacterial infections (see prevention of endocarditis later in this chapter). The same strategies aimed at preventing acute and recurrent rheumatic fever previously described for the patient with mitral stenosis apply to patients with aortic regurgitation.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s884">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A patient who is symptomatic or has developed a significant decrease in left ventricular function is advised to avoid physical exertion, competitive sports, and isometric exercise until the valve has been replaced (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Gati, Malhotra, &#x0026; Sharma, 2019</a>). If arrhythmias and heart failure occur, they are treated as described in Chapters 22 and 25. Controlling high blood pressure in patients with aortic regurgitation can improve forward blood flow through the heart. ACE inhibitors and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers may be recommended for management of hypertension; these are effective at reducing afterload. Beta-blockers are less commonly used, due to concern that a lower heart rate may actually increase blood pressure through negative chronotropic effects (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1800">Akinseye et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). Patients who are symptomatic should be instructed to restrict sodium intake to prevent volume overload and will require valve replacement (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1834">Nishimura, Otto, Bonow, et&#x00A0;al., 2014</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The treatment of choice is aortic valve replacement or valvuloplasty (described later), preferably performed before left ventricular failure occurs. Surgery is recommended for any patient with significant left ventricular dilation, regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1834">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2014</a>). Surgery is also recommended for any patient who is symptomatic (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1811">Flint, Wunderlich, Shmueli, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>