<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s891">Nursing Management: Valvular Heart Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse educates the patient with valvular heart disease about the diagnosis, progressive nature of the disease, and treatment plan. The patient is instructed to report new symptoms or changes in symptoms to the primary provider. The nurse also educates the patient that an infectious pathogen, usually a bacterium, can adhere to a diseased heart valve more readily than to a normal valve. Once attached to the valve, the infectious agent multiplies, resulting in endocarditis and further damage to the valve. In addition, the nurse educates the patient about how to minimize the risk of developing infective endocarditis (discussed later in this chapter).</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse measures the patient&#x2019;s heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate, compares these results with previous data, and notes any changes. Heart and lung sounds are auscultated, and peripheral pulses palpated. The nurse assesses the patient with valvular heart disease for the following:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Signs and symptoms of heart failure, such as fatigue, DOE, decreased activity tolerance, an increase in coughing, hemoptysis, multiple respiratory infections, orthopnea, and PND (see <a href="c25.xhtml">Chapter 25</a>)</span></li>
<li><span>Arrhythmias, by palpating the patient&#x2019;s pulse for strength and rhythm (i.e., regular or irregular) and asking whether the patient has experienced palpitations or felt forceful heartbeats (see <a href="c22.xhtml">Chapter 22</a>)</span></li>
<li><span>Symptoms such as dizziness, syncope, increased weakness, or angina pectoris (see <a href="c23.xhtml">Chapter 23</a>)</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The nurse collaborates with the patient to develop a medication schedule and provides education about the name, dosage, actions, adverse effects, and any drug&#x2013;drug or drug&#x2013;food interactions of prescribed medications for heart failure, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page771" title="771"></span>arrhythmias, angina pectoris, or other symptoms. Specific precautions are emphasized, such as the risk to patients with aortic stenosis who experience angina pectoris and take nitroglycerin. The venous dilation that results from nitroglycerin use decreases blood return to the heart, thus decreasing cardiac output and increasing the risk of syncope and decreased coronary artery blood flow. The nurse educates the patient about the importance of attempting to relieve the symptoms of angina with rest and relaxation before taking nitroglycerin and to anticipate potential adverse effects.</p>
<p class="indent">For patients with heart failure, the nurse provides education on taking a daily weight and reporting sudden weight gain, as defined by the primary provider. The nurse may assist the patient with planning activity and rest periods to allow symptom relief while preventing deconditioning or loss of function. Care of patients treated with valvuloplasty or surgical valve replacement is described later in this chapter.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>