<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s873">Mitral Stenosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Mitral stenosis results in reduced blood flow from the left atrium into the left ventricle. It is usually caused by rheumatic endocarditis, which progressively thickens mitral valve leaflets and chordae tendineae, causing the leaflets to fuse together (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1833">Negi et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). Eventually, the mitral valve orifice narrows and progressively obstructs blood flow into the ventricle.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s874">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Normally, the mitral valve orifice is as wide as the diameter of three fingers. In severe mitral stenosis, the orifice narrows to the width of a pencil. Because of increased resistance through the narrowed valve orifice, the left atrium is less able to push blood into the left ventricle. This results in increased residual blood volume in the left atrium, which over time causes left atrial hypertrophy and dilation. Decreased blood flow into the left ventricle leads to reduced ventricular filling and decreased cardiac output. A stenotic valve fails to protect pulmonary veins from backward flow of blood from the atrium, resulting in congestion of the pulmonary circulation. The right ventricle must then contract against abnormally high pulmonary arterial pressure and is subjected to excessive strain. Over time, the right ventricle hypertrophies, enlarges, and eventually fails. If the heart rate increases, diastole is shortened; thus, the amount of time for forward flow of blood decreases, and more blood backs into the pulmonary veins. Therefore, as the heart rate increases, cardiac output further decreases, and pulmonary pressures increase.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s875">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Often, the first symptom of mitral stenosis is dyspnea on exertion (DOE) caused by pulmonary venous hypertension. Symptoms do not usually develop until after the valve opening is reduced by one third to one half its usual size (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1853">Harb &#x0026; Griffin, 2017</a>). Patients may experience progressive fatigue and decreased exercise tolerance because of low cardiac output. An enlarged left atrium may create pressure on the left bronchial tree, resulting in a dry cough or wheezing. In cases of severe mitral stenosis with significant pulmonary congestion, patients may expectorate blood (i.e., hemoptysis) or experience palpitations, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND), or repeated respiratory infections. Increased blood volume and pressure cause the left atrium to dilate, hypertrophy, and become electrically unstable, which may result in patients developing atrial arrhythmias (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1833">Negi et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s876">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with mitral stenosis will have a low-pitched, rumbling diastolic murmur, best heard at the apex. Patients may have a weak and irregular pulse if they develop atrial fibrillation and may have signs or symptoms of heart failure (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Echocardiography is used to diagnose and quantify the severity of mitral stenosis. Electrocardiography (ECG), exercise testing, and cardiac catheterization with angiography may be used to help determine the severity of mitral stenosis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s877">Prevention</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Since rheumatic heart disease may result in mitral stenosis, prevention is aimed at decreasing the risk of contracting and providing early treatment for bacterial infections (see prevention of endocarditis later in this chapter). Prevention of acute rheumatic fever depends on effective antibiotic treatment of group A streptococcal infection (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Antibiotic prophylaxis for recurrent rheumatic fever with rheumatic carditis may require 10 or more years of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page769" title="769"></span>antibiotic coverage (e.g., penicillin G intramuscularly every 4 weeks, penicillin V orally twice daily, sulfadiazine orally daily, or erythromycin orally twice daily) (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1846">Szczygielska, Hernik, Kolodziejczyk, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s878">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Congestive heart failure is treated as described in Chapter 25. Patients with severe left atrial dilation in mitral stenosis may benefit from anticoagulant medications to decrease the risk of developing atrial thrombi. If atrial fibrillation develops, cardioversion may be attempted to restore normal sinus rhythm. If unsuccessful, the ventricular rate is controlled with beta-blockers, digoxin, or calcium channel blockers; furthermore, patients will require anticoagulation for thromboembolism prevention (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1819">January, Wann, Calkins, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). Patients with severe mitral stenosis are advised to avoid strenuous activities, competitive sports, and pregnancy, all of which increase heart rate (<a href="c24-sec15.xhtml#bib1835">Nishimura et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Surgical intervention consists of valvuloplasty, usually a <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;commissurotomy:&lt;/b&gt; splitting or separating fused cardiac valve leaflets">commissurotomy</button></strong> (i.e., splitting or separating leaflets) to open the fused commissure of the valve. The <em>commissure</em> is the site where valve leaflets meet. Percutaneous transluminal valvuloplasty or valve replacement may be performed.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>