<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s937">Thromboembolism</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with cardiovascular disorders are at risk for the development of arterial thromboemboli and venous thromboemboli (VTE). Intracardiac thrombi can form in patients with atrial fibrillation because the atria do not contract forcefully, resulting in slow and turbulent flow, and increasing the likelihood of thrombus formation. Mural thrombi can also form on ventricular walls when contractility is poor. Intracardiac thrombi can break off and travel through the circulation to other structures, including the brain, where they cause a stroke. Clots within the cardiac chambers can be detected by an echocardiogram and treated with anticoagulant agents, such as heparin and warfarin (see Chapter 26 for further discussion of assessment and treatment of VTEs; <a href="c26-sec14.xhtml#tt26-2">Table 26-2</a> discusses specific anticoagulant medications).</p>
<p class="indent">Decreased mobility and other factors in patients with cardiac disease also can lead to clot formation in the deep veins of the legs. Although signs and symptoms of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) can vary, patients may report leg pain and swelling and the leg may appear erythematous and feel warm. These clots can break off and travel through the inferior vena cava and through the right side of the heart into the pulmonary artery, where they can cause a pulmonary embolus (PE) (see Chapter 26 for further discussion of assessment and treatment of PE).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>