<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1041">Lymphedema</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Lymphedema may be primary (congenital malformations) or secondary (acquired obstructions). Tissue swelling occurs in the extremities because of an increased quantity of lymph that results from obstruction of lymphatic vessels. It is especially marked when the extremity is in a dependent position. Initially, the edema is soft and pitting. As the condition progresses, the edema becomes firm, nonpitting, and unresponsive to treatment. The most common type is congenital lymphedema, known as lymphedema praecox, which is caused by hypoplasia of the lymphatic system of the lower extremity. This disorder is usually seen in women and first appears before age 35 (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1924">Dayan, Ly, Kataru, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The obstruction may be in the lymph nodes and the lymphatic vessels. Sometimes, it is seen in the arm after an axillary node dissection (e.g., for breast cancer) and in the leg in association with varicose veins or chronic thrombophlebitis. In the latter case, the lymphatic obstruction usually is caused by chronic lymphangitis. Lymphatic obstruction caused by a parasite (filaria) is most frequently seen in the tropics. When chronic swelling is present, there may be frequent bouts of acute infection characterized by high fever and chills and increased residual edema once the inflammation has resolved. These changes can lead to chronic fibrosis, thickening of the subcutaneous tissues, and hypertrophy of the skin. This specific type of lymphedema, in which chronic swelling of the extremity recedes only slightly with elevation, is referred to as elephantiasis. There are an estimated 120 million people in the world infected by lymph-dwelling filarial parasites; of these, 40 million have lymphedema and secondary infections, creating an enormous global burden (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1943">King, Suamani, Sanuku, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 860</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page861" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="861">p. 861</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1042">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goal of therapy is to reduce and control the edema and prevent infection. Active and passive exercises assist in moving lymphatic fluid into the bloodstream. External compression devices milk the fluid proximally from the foot to the hip or from the hand to the axilla. When the patient is ambulatory, custom-fitted graduated compression stockings or sleeves are worn; those with the highest compression strength (exceeding 40 mm Hg) are suggested; however, many patients cannot tolerate these pressures. When the leg is affected, continuous bed rest with the leg elevated may aid in mobilizing the fluids but is not practical long term. Manual lymphatic drainage performed by specially trained therapists is designed to direct or shift the congested lymph through functioning lymphatics that have preserved drainage. Manual lymphatic drainage is performed with light touch (as opposed to deep massage) to the proximal then distal lymphatic channels. Manual lymphatic drainage is incorporated in a sequential treatment approach used in combination with multilayer compression bandages, stockings or wraps, exercises, skin care, pressure gradient sleeves, and pneumatic pumps, depending on the severity and stage of the lymphedema (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Patullo &#x0026; Rajagopalan, 2017</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">As initial therapy, the diuretic furosemide may be prescribed to prevent fluid overload due to mobilization of extracellular fluid. Diuretics have also been used along with elevation of the leg and the use of graduated compression stockings or sleeves. The use of diuretics alone has little benefit because their main action is to limit capillary filtration by decreasing the circulating blood volume. If lymphangitis or cellulitis is present, antibiotic therapy is initiated. Lymphedema significantly increases the risk for cellulitis; therefore, the patient is taught to provide meticulous skin care and inspect the skin for evidence of infection.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Surgery is performed if the edema is severe and uncontrolled by medical therapy, if mobility is severely compromised, or if infection persists. One surgical approach involves the excision of the affected subcutaneous tissue and fascia, with skin grafting to cover the defect. Another procedure involves the surgical relocation of superficial lymphatic vessels into the deep lymphatic system, also known as lymph node transfer, by means of a buried dermal flap to provide a conduit for lymphatic drainage (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Pappalardo, Patel, &#x0026; Cheng, 2018</a>). Lymphaticovenous bypasses also are performed with anastomosing the end of the lymphatic vessels to the side of veins to reduce lymphatic flow in the limbs (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Gallagher, Marulanda, &#x0026; Gray, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1043">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">After surgery, antibiotics may be prescribed for 3 to 7 days (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Pappalardo et al., 2018</a>). Constant elevation of the affected extremity and observation for complications are essential. Complications may include flap necrosis, hematoma or abscess under the flap, and cellulitis. The nurse instructs the patient or caregiver to inspect the dressing daily. Unusual drainage or any inflammation around the wound margin suggests infection and should be reported to the surgeon. The patient is informed that there may be a loss of sensation in the surgical area. The patient is also instructed to avoid the application of heating pads or exposure to sun to prevent burns or trauma to the area.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>