<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1033">Varicose Veins</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Varicose veins (varicosities) are abnormally dilated, tortuous, superficial veins caused by incompetent venous valves (see <a href="c26-sec15.xhtml#ff26-15">Fig. 26-15</a>). Most commonly, this condition occurs in the lower extremities, the saphenous veins, or the lower trunk, but it can occur elsewhere in the body, such as the esophagus (e.g., esophageal varices; see <a href="c43.xhtml">Chapter 43</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">It is estimated that varicose veins occur in 23% of American adults, and if spider telangiectasias and reticular veins are included in these statistics, the prevalence increases to 80% of men and 85% of women (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>). The condition is most common in people whose occupations require prolonged standing, such as salespeople, hairstylists, teachers, nurses and ancillary medical personnel, and construction workers. A hereditary weakness of the vein wall may contribute to the development of varicosities, and it commonly occurs in several members of the same family. Varicose veins are rare before puberty. Pregnancy may cause varicosities because of hormonal effects related to decreased venous outflow, increased pressure by the gravid uterus, and increased blood volume (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1927">Della Torre, Sutherland, &#x0026; Digiovanni, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1034">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Varicose veins may be primary (without involvement of deep veins) or secondary (resulting from obstruction of deep veins). A reflux of venous blood results in venous stasis. If only the superficial veins are affected, the person may have no symptoms but may be concerned by the appearance of the veins.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1035">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms, if present, may include dull aches, muscle cramps, increased muscle fatigue in the lower legs, ankle edema, and a feeling of heaviness of the legs. Nocturnal cramps are common. When deep venous obstruction results in varicose veins, the patient may develop the signs and symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency: edema, pain, pigmentation, and ulcerations. Susceptibility to injury and infection is increased, thus increasing risk for ulceration.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1036">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnostic tests for varicose veins include the duplex ultrasound scan, which documents the anatomic site of reflux and provides a quantitative measure of the severity of valvular reflux. These scans are typically performed in a reverse Trendelenburg position or with the patient standing. Venography is now rarely performed due to the availability of ultrasound. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page859" title="859"></span>However, when it is used, it involves injecting a radiopaque contrast agent into the leg veins so that the vein anatomy can be visualized by x-ray studies during various leg movements. CT venography can be helpful, especially if the pelvic venous structures are involved.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1037">Prevention and Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient should avoid activities that cause venous stasis, such as wearing socks that are too tight at the top or that leave marks on the skin, crossing the legs at the thighs, and sitting or standing for long periods. Changing position frequently, elevating the legs 3 to 6 inches higher than heart level when they are tired, and getting up to walk for several minutes of every hour promote circulation. The patient is encouraged to walk 30 minutes each day if there are no contraindications. Walking up the stairs rather than using the elevator or escalator is helpful, and swimming is good exercise.</p>
<p class="indent">Graduated compression stockings, especially knee-high stockings, are useful. The patient who is overweight should be encouraged to begin a weight reduction plan.</p>
<p class="indent">The most common treatment options for venous insufficiency and varicose veins are thermal ablation with radiofrequency and laser therapy, micro (stab) phlebectomy, and foam sclerotherapy. Surgical ligation and stripping are reserved for select cases not amenable to other treatment options.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Thermal Ablation</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Thermal ablation is a nonsurgical approach using thermal energy. Radiofrequency ablation uses an electrical contact inside the vein. As the device is withdrawn, the vein is sealed. Laser ablation uses a laser fiber tip that seals the vein (decompressed). Topical gel may be used first to numb the skin along the course of the saphenous vein. To protect the surrounding tissue, several small punctures are made along the vein, and 100 to 200 mL of dilute lidocaine is delivered to the perivenous space using ultrasound guidance. The goal of this tumescent anesthesia (i.e., anesthesia that causes localized swelling) is to provide analgesia, thermal protection (the cuff of fluid surrounds the veins and accompanying nerves), and extrinsic compression of the vein (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1957">Poder, Fisette, B&#x00E9;dard, et al., 2018</a>). The saphenous vein is entered percutaneously near the knee using ultrasound guidance. A catheter is introduced into the saphenous vein and advanced to the saphenofemoral junction. The device is then activated and withdrawn, sealing the vein. Bandages or graduated compression stockings are applied after the procedure. A simultaneous microphlebectomy of branch varicosities may be performed; this is associated with a lower incidence of thrombophlebitis. This is also associated with quality of life improvements such as decreased leg swelling, pain, skin changes and healing of ulcerations, because all symptomatic veins may be treated at one time (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Berti-Hearn &#x0026; Elliott, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Cyanoacrylate embolization is approved for the treatment of an incompetent greater saphenous vein. Cyanoacrylate adhesive has been used for the treatment of arteriovenous malformations and a modified cyanoacrylate adhesive was developed that has rapid polymerization on contact with blood and tissue, flexibility sufficient to tolerate dynamic movements in the legs without generation of symptoms or be perceptible by the patient, and has a high viscosity to decrease the risk of propagation or embolization into the deep veins (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>). During this procedure, a sheath is placed into the greater saphenous vein (guided by ultrasound). A catheter is advanced to the proximal saphenous vein and injections of cyanoacrylate are given, followed by local compression, and then repeated injections with repeated compression until the entire length of the target vein segment is treated. Cyanoacrylate embolization has been associated with less procedural ecchymosis because heat is not needed during this procedure.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Microphlebectomy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">If there are superficial varicose veins that are close to the surface, a microphlebectomy may be performed. This procedure involves removal of a superficial varicosity using anywhere from one to 20 small incisions. There can be extensive bruising and risk of infection with this procedure (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Sclerotherapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Sclerotherapy involves injection of an irritating chemical into a vein to produce localized phlebitis and fibrosis, thereby obliterating the lumen of the vein. This treatment may be performed alone for small varicosities or may follow vein ablation, ligation, or stripping. Sclerotherapy is typically performed in a procedure room and does not require sedation. After the sclerosing agent is injected, graduated compression stockings are applied to the leg and are worn for approximately 1 week after the procedure. Ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy has been found to be more effective in achieving closure of the branch veins. It is also associated with decreased symptoms of leg aching, itching, and edema, less skin changes and ulcerations, and increased patient satisfaction (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Berti-Hearn &#x0026; Elliott, 2019</a>). After sclerotherapy, walking is encouraged to activate the calf muscle pump and maintain blood flow in the leg.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Ligation and Stripping</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Surgery for symptomatic varicose veins requires that the deep veins be patent and functional. The saphenous vein is ligated high in the groin, where the saphenous vein meets the femoral vein. In addition, the vein may be stripped (removed). After the vein is ligated, an incision is made 2 to 3 cm below the knee, and a metal or plastic wire is passed the full length of the vein to the point of ligation. The wire is then withdrawn, pulling (stripping) the vein as it is removed. Pressure and elevation minimize bleeding during surgery.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1038">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Thermal ablation is performed in an outpatient or clinic setting. The patient is advised to maintain compression on the affected limb for at least 24 hours and then wear compression stockings while ambulatory for at least 1 week post procedure. Patients have no activity restrictions, but are advised to avoid strenuous exercise, such as weight lifting, bicycle riding, or swimming for 2 weeks. The patient is informed that bruising may occur along the course of the saphenous vein and that they may experience leg cramps for a few days and may find it difficult to straighten the knee for up to 1.5 weeks. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen and cool compresses are used as needed for pain.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 859</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page860" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="860">p. 860</span></div>
<p class="indent">Ligation and stripping can be performed in an outpatient setting, or the patient may be admitted to the hospital on the day of surgery and discharged the same or next day if a bilateral procedure is to be performed or the patient is at high risk for postoperative complications. If the procedure is performed in an outpatient setting, nursing measures are the same as if the patient were hospitalized. Bed rest is discouraged, and the patient is encouraged to ambulate as soon as sedation has worn off. The patient is instructed to walk every hour for 5 to 10 minutes while awake for the first 24 hours if they can tolerate the discomfort, and then to increase walking and activity as tolerated. Graduated compression stockings are worn continuously for about 1 week after vein stripping. The nurse assists the patient to perform exercises and move the legs. The foot of the bed should be elevated. Standing and sitting are discouraged.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Promoting Comfort and Understanding</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Analgesic agents are prescribed to help the patient move the affected extremities more comfortably. Dressings are inspected for bleeding, particularly in the groin, where the risk of bleeding is greatest. The nurse is alert for reported sensations of &#x201C;pins and needles.&#x201D; Hypersensitivity to touch in the involved extremity may indicate a temporary or permanent nerve injury resulting from surgery, because the saphenous vein and nerve are close to each other in the leg. Any of these signs or symptoms should be reported to the primary provider.</p>
<p class="indent">Usually, the patient may shower after 24 hours. A clean towel is used to gently pat dry, not rub, the incisions. Application of skin lotion is avoided until the incisions are completely healed to avoid infection. The patient is instructed to apply sunscreen to the incisional area prior to sun exposure; otherwise, hyperpigmentation of the incision, scarring, or both may occur.</p>
<p class="indent">If the patient has undergone sclerotherapy, a burning sensation in the injected leg may be experienced for 1 to 2 days. The nurse encourages the use of a mild analgesic medication as prescribed and walking to provide relief.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Promoting Home, Community-Based, and Transitional Care</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Long-term venous compression is essential after discharge, and the patient needs to obtain adequate supplies of graduated compression stockings or elastic bandages. Exercise of the legs is necessary; the development of an individualized plan requires consultation with the patient and the health care team.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>