<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1005">Raynaud&#x2019;s Phenomenon and Other Acrosyndromes</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon is a form of intermittent arteriolar vasoconstriction that results in coldness, pain, and pallor of the fingertips or toes. There are two forms of this disorder. Primary or idiopathic Raynaud&#x2019;s (Raynaud&#x2019;s disease) occurs in the absence of an underlying disease. Secondary Raynaud (Raynaud syndrome) occurs in association with an underlying disease, usually a connective tissue disorder, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or scleroderma; trauma; or obstructive arterial lesions. Symptoms may result from a defect in basal heat production that eventually decreases the ability of cutaneous vessels to dilate. Episodes may be triggered by emotional factors, stress, or by unusual sensitivity to cold. Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon is five times more common in women with the typical onset before age 30 (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Dean, 2018</a>). Acrocyanosis has been thought to be a variant of Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon because both are aggravated by cold and emotional stress and both present with blue discoloration of the fingers and hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating).</p>
<p class="indent">The prognosis for patients with Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon varies; some slowly improve, some become progressively worse, and others show no change. Raynaud symptoms may be mild so that treatment is not required. However, secondary Raynaud is characterized by vasospasm and fixed blood vessel obstructions that may lead to ischemia, ulceration, and gangrene. Acrocyanosis is a poorly understood phenomenon that may be benign and require little or no treatment, or the patient may have chronic pain and ulcerations.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1006">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The classic clinical picture of Raynaud reveals pallor brought on by sudden vasoconstriction. The skin then becomes cyanotic because of pooling of deoxygenated blood during vasospasm. As a result of hyperemia (exaggerated reflow) due to vasodilation, rubor is produced when oxygenated blood returns to the digits after the vasospasm stops. The characteristic sequence of color change of Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon is described as white, blue, and red. Numbness, tingling, and burning pain occur as the color changes. The manifestations tend to be bilateral and symmetric and may involve toes and fingers.</p>
<p class="indent">Acrocyanosis is differentiated from Raynaud by a relative persistence of skin color changes, symmetry, and an absence of the paroxysmal pallor that is found with Raynaud. Almost all patients with acrocyanosis have marked clamminess and hyperhidrosis of their hands and feet, which tend to worsen in warmer temperatures while the color changes improve. Finger color normalizes when the hands are transferred from the dependent to horizontal position (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Dean, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1007">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Avoiding the particular stimulus (e.g., cold, nicotine) that provokes vasoconstriction is a primary factor in controlling Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon. Decongestants and other over-the-counter preparations containing sympathomimetics should be avoided. Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, amlodipine) may be effective in relieving symptoms. Sympathectomy (interrupting the sympathetic nerves by removing the sympathetic ganglia, or blocking or dividing their branches) may help some patients.</p>
<p class="indent">Avoidance of exposure to cold and trauma and implementing measures to improve local circulation are the primary focus of treatment for acrocyanosis. Calcium channel blockers have not been effective in treating acrocyanosis (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1915">Belch, Carlizza, Carpentier, et al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1008">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse instructs the patient with Raynaud or acrocyanosis to avoid situations that may be stressful or unsafe. Stress management strategies may be helpful. Exposure to cold must be minimized, and in areas where the fall and winter months are cold, the patient should wear layers of clothing when outdoors. Hats and gloves or mittens should be worn at all times when outside. Fabrics specially designed for cold climates (e.g., Thinsulate<sup>&#x2122;</sup>) are recommended. Patients should wear gloves when accessing freezers. Patients should warm up their vehicles before getting in so that they can avoid touching a cold steering wheel or door handle, which could elicit an attack. During summer, a sweater should be available when entering air-conditioned rooms.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients are often concerned about serious complications, such as gangrene and amputation; however, these complications are uncommon unless the patient has another underlying disease causing arterial occlusions. Patients should avoid all forms of nicotine, which may induce attacks; this includes nicotine gum or patches used to aid smoking cessation.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients should be cautioned to handle sharp objects carefully to avoid injuring their fingers. In addition, patients should be informed about the orthostatic hypotension that may result from medications, such as calcium channel blockers, used to treat Raynaud&#x2019;s phenomenon.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>