<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s993">Aortic Dissection</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Occasionally, in an aorta diseased by arteriosclerosis, a tear develops in the intima or the media degenerates, resulting in a dissection (see <a href="c26-sec09.xhtml#ff26-11">Fig. 26-11</a>). Aortic dissections are three times more common in men than in women, occur most commonly in the 50- to 70-year age group and are associated with hypertension (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s994">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Aortic dissections (separations) are commonly associated with poorly controlled hypertension, blunt chest trauma, and cocaine use. The profound increase in sympathetic response caused by cocaine use creates an increase in the force of left ventricular contraction that causes heightened shear forces upon the aortic wall leading to disruption of the intima <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page842" title="842"></span>(<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>). Dissection is caused by rupture in the intimal layer. A rupture may occur through adventitia or into the lumen through the intima, allowing blood to reenter the main channel and resulting in chronic dissection (e.g., pseudoaneurysm) or occlusion of branches of the aorta.</p>
<p class="indent">As the separation progresses, the arteries branching from the involved area of the aorta shear and occlude. The tear occurs most commonly in the region of the aortic arch, with the highest mortality rate associated with ascending aortic dissection (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Sidawy &#x0026; Perler, 2019</a>). The dissection of the aorta may progress backward in the direction of the heart, obstructing the openings to the coronary arteries or producing hemopericardium (effusion of blood into the pericardial sac) or aortic insufficiency, or it may extend in the opposite direction, causing occlusion of the arteries supplying the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, spinal cord, and legs.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s995">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Onset of symptoms is usually sudden. Severe and persistent pain, described as tearing or ripping, may be reported. The pain is in the anterior chest or back and extends to the shoulders, epigastric area, or abdomen. Aortic dissection may be mistaken for an acute myocardial infarction, which confuses the clinical picture and initial treatment. Cardiovascular, neurologic, and gastrointestinal symptoms are responsible for other clinical manifestations, depending on the location and extent of the dissection. The patient may appear pale. Sweating and tachycardia may be detected. Blood pressure may be elevated or markedly different from one arm to the other if dissection involves the orifice of the subclavian artery on one side.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s996">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Arteriography, multidetector-computed tomography angiography (MDCTA), TEE, duplex ultrasonography, and MRA, while limited in terms of expediency during an emergency situation, may aid in the diagnosis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s997">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The medical or surgical treatment of an aortic dissection depends on the type of dissection present and follows the general principles outlined for the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s998">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A patient with an aortic dissection requires the same nursing care as a patient with an aortic aneurysm requiring intervention, as described earlier in this chapter. Nursing care as described in <a href="c26-sec05.xhtml#ct26-4">Chart 26-4</a> is also appropriate.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>