<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s950">Assessment of the Vascular System</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse should perform a focused health history and physical assessment to establish a patient&#x2019;s baseline and identify alterations in the vascular system.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s951">Health History</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse obtains an in-depth description from the patient with peripheral vascular disorders of any pain and its precipitating factors. A muscular, cramp-type pain, discomfort, or fatigue in the extremities consistently reproduced with the same degree of activity or exercise and relieved by rest is experienced by patients with peripheral arterial insufficiency. Referred to as <strong>intermittent claudication</strong>, this pain, discomfort, or fatigue is caused by the inability of the arterial system to provide adequate blood flow to the tissues in the face of increased demands for nutrients and oxygen during exercise. As the tissues are forced to complete the energy cycle without adequate nutrients and oxygen, muscle metabolites and lactic acid are produced. Pain is experienced as the metabolites aggravate the nerve endings of the surrounding tissue. Typically, about 50% of the arterial lumen or 75% of the cross-sectional area must be obstructed before intermittent claudication is experienced. When the patient rests and thereby decreases the metabolic needs of the muscles, the pain subsides. The progression of the arterial disease can be monitored by documenting the amount of exercise or the distance the patient can walk before the onset of pain. Distance is measured in blocks, feet, or meters. Persistent pain in the anterior portion of the foot (forefoot) when the patient is resting indicates a severe degree of arterial insufficiency and a critical state of ischemia. Known as <strong>rest pain</strong>, this discomfort is often worse at night and may interfere with sleep. This pain frequently requires that the extremity be lowered to a dependent position to improve perfusion to the distal tissues.</p>
<p class="indent">The site of arterial disease can be deduced from the location of claudication, because pain occurs in muscle groups distal to the diseased vessel. Calf pain may accompany reduced blood flow through the superficial femoral or popliteal artery, whereas pain in the hip or buttock may result from reduced blood flow in the abdominal aorta or the common iliac or hypogastric (also known as internal iliac) arteries.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s952">Physical Assessment</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A thorough assessment of the patient&#x2019;s skin color and temperature and the character or quality of the peripheral pulses is important in the diagnosis of arterial disorders.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Inspection of the Skin</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Adequate blood flow warms the extremities and gives individuals with lighter skin tones a rosy coloring. Inadequate blood flow results in cool and pale extremities. In people with pigmented skin, the color changes are often more difficult to discriminate because of the darker skin tone. Further reduction of blood flow to these tissues, which occurs when the extremity is elevated, for example, results in pallor (a whiter or more blanched appearance). <strong>Rubor</strong>, a reddish-blue discoloration of the extremities, may be observed within 20 seconds to 2 minutes after the extremity is placed in the dependent position. Rubor suggests severe peripheral arterial damage in which vessels that cannot constrict remain dilated. Even with rubor, the extremity begins to turn pale with elevation. <strong>Cyanosis</strong>, a bluish tint of the skin, is manifested when the amount of oxygenated hemoglobin contained in the blood is reduced.</p>
<p class="indent">Additional changes resulting from a chronically reduced nutrient supply include loss of hair, brittle nails, dry or scaling skin, atrophy, and ulcerations. Edema may be apparent bilaterally or unilaterally and is related to the affected extremity&#x2019;s chronically dependent position because of rest pain. Gangrenous changes appear after prolonged, severe ischemia and represent tissue necrosis.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Palpation of Pulses</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Determining the presence or absence, as well as the quality, of peripheral pulses is important in assessing the status of peripheral arterial circulation (see <a href="c26-sec03.xhtml#ff26-2">Fig. 26-2</a>). Pulse assessment in an edematous extremity should be undertaken with caution. Palpation of pulses is subjective, and the nurse may mistake their own pulse for that of the patient. To prevent this, the nurse should use light touch and use more than just the index finger for palpation, because this finger has the strongest arterial pulsation of all the fingers. The thumb should not be used for the same reason. Absence of a pulse may indicate that the site of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;stenosis:&lt;/b&gt; narrowing or obstruction of a cardiac valve&#x2019;s orifice">stenosis</button></strong> (narrowing or constriction) or occlusion is proximal to that level. Occlusive arterial disease impairs blood flow and can reduce or obliterate palpable pulsations in the extremities. Pulses should be palpated bilaterally and simultaneously, comparing both sides for symmetry in rate, rhythm, and quality.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>