<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1040">Lymphangitis and Lymphadenitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Lymphangitis is an acute inflammation of the lymphatic channels. It arises most commonly from a focal area of infection in an extremity. Usually, the infectious organism is a <em>hemolytic streptococcus</em>. The characteristic red streaks that extend up the arm or the leg from an infected wound outline the course of the lymphatic vessels as they drain.</p>
<p class="indent">The lymph nodes located along the course of the lymphatic channels also become enlarged, red, and tender; this is referred to as acute lymphadenitis. They can also become necrotic and form an abscess, called suppurative lymphadenitis. The nodes involved most often are those in the groin, axilla, or cervical region.</p>
<p class="indent">Because these infections are nearly always caused by organisms that are sensitive to antibiotics, it is unusual to see abscess formation. Recurrent episodes of lymphangitis are often associated with progressive lymphedema. After acute attacks, a graduated compression stocking should be worn on the affected extremity for several months to prevent long-term edema.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>