<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s980">Aortoiliac Disease</h4>
<p class="nonindent">If collateral circulation has developed, patients with a stenosis or occlusion of the aortoiliac segment may be asymptomatic, or they may complain of buttock or low back discomfort associated with walking. Men may have erectile dysfunction or experience impotence. These patients may have decreased or absent femoral pulses.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s981">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The treatment of aortoiliac disease is essentially the same as that for atherosclerotic PAD. An endovascular procedure, such as bilateral common iliac stents, may be attempted if the aorta has a less than 50% diameter reduction (<a href="c26-sec21.xhtml#bib1983">Gerhard-Herman et al., 2016</a>). If there is significant aortic disease, the surgical procedure of choice is the aortoiliac graft. If possible, the distal graft is anastomosed to the iliac artery, and the entire surgical procedure is performed within the abdomen. If the iliac vessels are occluded, the distal anastomosis is made to the femoral arteries (aortobifemoral graft). A femoral&#x2013;femoral crossover graft may also be needed to maintain circulation. Bifurcated woven or knitted Dacron grafts are preferred for this surgical procedure.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s982">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Preprocedural or preoperative assessment, in addition to the standard parameters (see <a href="c14.xhtml">Chapter 14</a>), includes evaluating the brachial, radial, ulnar, femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis pulses to establish a baseline for follow-up after arterial lines are placed and postoperatively. Patient education includes an overview of the procedure to be performed, the preparation for an endovascular procedure or surgery, and the anticipated postprocedural or postoperative plan of care. Sights, sounds, and sensations that the patient may experience are discussed.</p>
<p class="indent">Postprocedural endovascular care mirrors the care described for the patient who has had endovascular repair of an aortic aneurysm (see later discussion). Postoperative care includes monitoring for signs of thrombosis in arteries distal to the surgical site. The nurse assesses color and temperature of the extremity, capillary refill time, sensory and motor function, and pulses by palpation and Doppler initially every 15 minutes and then at progressively longer intervals if the patient&#x2019;s status remains stable. Any dusky or bluish discoloration, coldness, decrease in sensory or motor function, or decrease in pulse quality is reported immediately to the primary provider.</p>
<p class="indent">Postoperative care also includes monitoring urine output and ensuring that output is at least 0.5 mL/kg/h. Renal function may be impaired as a result of hypoperfusion from hypotension, ischemia to the renal arteries during the surgical procedure, hypovolemia, or embolization of the renal artery or renal parenchyma. Vital signs, pain, and intake and output are monitored with the pulse and extremity assessments. Results of laboratory tests are monitored and reported to the primary provider. Abdominal assessment for bowel sounds and paralytic ileus is performed at least every 8 hours. Bowel sounds may not return before the third postoperative day. The absence of bowel sounds, absence of flatus, and abdominal distention are indications of paralytic ileus. Manual manipulation of the bowel during surgery may have caused bruising, resulting in decreased peristalsis. Nasogastric suction may be necessary to decompress the bowel until peristalsis returns. A liquid bowel movement before the third postoperative day may indicate bowel ischemia, which may occur when the mesenteric blood supply (celiac, superior mesenteric, or inferior mesenteric arteries) is occluded. Ischemic bowel usually causes increased pain and a markedly elevated white blood cell count (20,000 to 30,000 cells/mm<sup>3</sup>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>