<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1069">Therapeutic Approaches to Hematologic Disorders</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1070">Splenectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The surgical removal of the spleen, called splenectomy, is a possible treatment for some hematologic disorders. For example, an enlarged spleen may be the site of excessive destruction of blood cells. In addition, some patients with grossly enlarged spleens develop severe thrombocytopenia as a result of platelets being sequestered in the spleen. Splenectomy removes the &#x201C;trap,&#x201D; and platelet counts may normalize over time.</p>
<p class="indent">Laparoscopic splenectomy is associated with decreased postoperative morbidity compared to open splenectomy. Acute risks associated with a splenectomy include hemorrhage, increased clotting, and injury to surrounding organs and tissues. Long-term risks post splenectomy includes greater likelihood to develop life-threatening infections. Patients should be vaccinated for pneumonia before undergoing splenectomy, if possible. The patient is instructed to seek prompt medical attention for even minor symptoms of infection. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2020) recommends patients without spleens receive vaccines for influenza, pneumonia, and meningococci. Also, if a patient has other conditions that increase risk of serious infection in addition to a history of splenectomy, they may need antibiotic prophylaxis (Mayo Clinic, 2018b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1071">Therapeutic Apheresis</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><em>Apheresis</em> is a Greek word meaning &#x201C;separation.&#x201D; In therapeutic apheresis (or pheresis), blood is taken from the patient and passed through a centrifuge, where a specific component is separated from the blood, removed (see <a href="#tt28-3">Table 28-3</a>), and the remaining blood is returned to the patient. The entire system is closed, so the risk of bacterial contamination is low. When platelets or leukocytes are removed, the decrease in these cells within the circulation is temporary. Platelet donors can have their platelets apheresed as often as every 14 days. Leukocytes can be obtained similarly, typically after the donor has received growth factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) to stimulate the formation of additional leukocytes and thereby increase the leukocyte count. The use of these growth factors also stimulates the release of stem cells within the circulation. Apheresis is used to harvest these stem cells (typically over a period of several days) for use in peripheral blood stem cell transplant (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2063">Padmanabhan, Smith, Aqui, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). Sometimes plasma is removed rather than blood cells, and this process is called plasmapheresis. Indications for plasmapheresis include obtaining plasma for transfusion and removing dangerous substances such as immune complexes and autoantibodies (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2079">Sarode, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1072">Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a therapeutic modality that offers the possibility of cure for some <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page896" title="896"></span>patients with hematologic disorders such as severe aplastic anemia, some forms of leukemia, and thalassemia. It can also provide longer remission from disease even when cure is not possible, such as in multiple myeloma. Hematopoietic stem cells may be transplanted from either allogeneic or autologous donors. For most hematologic diseases, allogeneic transplant is more effective (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2079">Bazinet &#x0026; Popradi, 2019</a>); here, stem cells are obtained from a donor whose cells match those of the patient. In contrast, the patient&#x2019;s own stem cells are harvested and then used in autologous transplant. (See <a href="c12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a> for a detailed discussion of HSCT.)</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt28-3">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;28-3</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Types of Apheresis<em><sup><a id="iftt2" href="#ftt2">a</a></sup></em></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Procedure</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Purpose</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Examples of Clinical Use</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Plateletpheresis</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove platelets</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Extreme thrombocytosis, essential thrombocythemia (temporary measure); single-donor platelet transfusion</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Leukapheresis</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove WBCs (can be specific to neutrophils or lymphocytes)</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Extreme leukocytosis (e.g., AML, CML) (very temporary measure); harvest WBCs for transfusion</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Erythrocytapheresis (RBC exchange)</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove RBCs</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">RBC dyscrasias (e.g., sickle cell disease); RBCs replaced via transfusion</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Plasmapheresis (plasma exchange)</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove plasma proteins</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyperviscosity syndromes; treatment for some renal and neurologic diseases (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome, TTP, Guillain&#x2013;Barr&#x00E9;, myasthenia gravis)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Stem cell harvest</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Remove circulating stem cells</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Transplantation (donor harvest or autologous)</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource"><em><sup><a id="ftt2" href="#iftt2">a</a></sup></em>Therapeutic apheresis can be used to treat a wide variety of conditions. When it is used to treat a disease that causes an increase in a specific cell type with a short life in circulation (i.e., WBCs, platelets), the reduction in those cells is temporary. However, this temporary reduction permits a margin of safety while waiting for a longer-lasting treatment modality (e.g., chemotherapy) to take effect. Apheresis can also be used to obtain stem cells for transplantation, either from a matched donor (allogeneic) or from the patient (autologous).</p>
<p class="tablesource">AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia; RBC, red blood cell; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura; WBCs, white blood cells.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Padmanabhan, A., Smith, L., Aqui, N., et&#x00A0;al. (2019). Guidelines on the use of therapeutic apheresis in clinical practice&#x2014;evidence-based approach from the Writing Committee of the American Society for Apheresis: The eighth special issue. <em>Journal of Clinical Apheresis</em>, <em>34</em>(3), 171&#x2013;354.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1073">Therapeutic Phlebotomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Therapeutic phlebotomy is the removal of a certain amount of blood under controlled conditions. Patients with elevated hematocrits (e.g., those with polycythemia vera) or excessive iron absorption (e.g., hemochromatosis) can usually be managed by periodically removing 1 unit (about 500 mL) of whole blood. Over time, this process can produce iron deficiency, leaving the patient unable to produce as many erythrocytes. The actual procedure for therapeutic phlebotomy is similar to that for blood donation (see later discussion).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1074">Blood Component Therapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A single unit of whole blood contains 450 mL of blood and 50 mL of an anticoagulant, which can be processed and dispensed for administration. However, it is more appropriate, economical, and practical to separate that unit of whole blood into its primary components: erythrocytes, platelets, and plasma (leukocytes are rarely used; see later discussion).</p>
<p class="indent">Each component must be processed and stored differently to maximize the longevity of the viable cells and factors within it; thus, each individual blood component has a different storage life. Because the plasma is removed, a unit of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) is very concentrated (hematocrit approximately 70%) (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2027">Butterworth, Mackey, &#x0026;Wasnick, 2018</a>). PRBCs are stored at 4&#x00B0;C (39.2&#x00B0;F). With special preservatives, they can be stored safely for up to 42 days before they must be discarded (American Red Cross, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">In contrast, platelets must be stored at room temperature because they cannot withstand cold temperatures, and they last for only 5 days before they must be discarded. To prevent clumping, platelets are gently agitated while stored. Plasma is immediately frozen to maintain the activity of the clotting factors within; it lasts for 1 year if it remains frozen. Alternatively, plasma can be further pooled and processed into blood derivatives, such as albumin, immune globulin, factor VIII, and factor IX. <a href="#tt28-4">Table 28-4</a> describes each blood component and how it is commonly used.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Special Preparations</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Factor VIII concentrate (antihemophilic factor) is a lyophilized, freeze-dried concentrate of pooled fractionated human plasma used in treating hemophilia A. Factor IX concentrate (prothrombin complex) is similarly prepared and contains factors II, VII, IX, and X. It is used primarily for the treatment of factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B). Factor IX concentrate is also useful in treating congenital factor VII and factor X deficiencies. Recombinant forms of factor VIII, such as Humate-P or Alphanate, are also useful. Because they contain von Willebrand factor, these agents are used in von Willebrand disease as well as in hemophilia A, particularly when patients develop factor VIII inhibitors.</p>
<p class="indent">Plasma albumin is a large protein molecule that usually stays within vessels and is a major contributor to plasma oncotic pressure. This protein is used to expand the blood volume of patients in hypovolemic shock and, rarely, to increase the concentration of circulating albumin in patients with hypoalbuminemia.</p>
<p class="indent">Immune globulin is a concentrated solution of the antibody immunoglobulin G (IgG), prepared from large pools of plasma. It contains very little immunoglobulin A (IgA) or IgM. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is used in various clinical situations to replace inadequate amounts of IgG in patients who are at risk for recurrent bacterial infection <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page897" title="897"></span>(e.g., those with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, those receiving HSCT). It is also used in certain autoimmune disorders, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). Albumin, antihemophilic factors, and IVIG, in contrast to all other fractions of human blood, cells, or plasma, can survive being subjected to heating at 60&#x00B0;C (140&#x00B0;F) for 10 hours to free them of the viral contaminants that may be present.</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt28-4">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;28-4</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Blood and Blood Components Commonly Used in Transfusion Therapy<em><sup><a id="iftt3" href="#ftt3">a</a></sup></em></p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Component</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Composition</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Indications and Considerations</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Whole blood</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cells and plasma, hematocrit about 40%</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Volume replacement and oxygen-carrying capacity; usually used only in significant bleeding (&#x003E;25% blood volume lost)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">PRBCs</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">RBCs with little plasma (hematocrit about 75%); some platelets and WBCs remain</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x2191; RBC mass; symptomatic anemia:</p>
<p class="Box3BL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Platelets within the unit are not functional</p>
<p class="Box3BL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>WBCs within the unit may cause reaction and are not functional</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Platelets&#x2014;random</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Platelets (5.5 &#x00D7; 10<sup>10</sup> platelets/unit), plasma; some RBCs, WBCs</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Bleeding due to severe &#x2193; platelets</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Prevent bleeding when platelets &#x003C;5,000&#x2013;10,000/mm<sup>3</sup></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Survival &#x2193; in presence of fever, chills, infection</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Repeated treatment leads to &#x2193; survival due to alloimmunization</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Platelets&#x2014;single donor</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Platelets (3 &#x00D7; 10<sup>11</sup> platelets/unit)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">1 unit is equivalent to 6&#x2013;8 units of random platelets</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Used for repeated treatment:</p>
<p class="Box3BL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>darr; alloimmunization risk by limiting exposure to multiple donors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Plasma</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Plasma; all coagulation factors</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Complement</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Bleeding in patients with coagulation factor deficiencies; plasmapheresis</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Granulocytes</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Neutrophils (&#x003E;1 &#x00D7; 10<sup>10</sup>/unit); some lymphocytes, RBCs, and platelets will remain within the unit</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Severe neutropenia in select patients; controversial</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Lymphocytes</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Lymphocytes (number varies)</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Stimulate graft-vs.-host disease effect</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cryoprecipitate</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Fibrinogen &#x2265;150 mg/bag, AHF (VIII:C) 80&#x2013;110 units/bag, von Willebrand factor; fibronectin</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">von Willebrand disease</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypofibrinogenemia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hemophilia A</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">AHF</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Factor VIII</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hemophilia A</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Factor IX concentrate</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Factor IX</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hemophilia B (Christmas disease)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Factor IX complex</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Factors II, VII, IX, X</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hereditary factor VII, IX, X deficiency; hemophilia A with factor VII inhibitors</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Albumin</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Albumin 5%, 25%</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypoproteinemia; burns; volume expansion by 5% to &#x2191; blood volume; 25% leads to &#x2193; hematocrit</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">IV gamma-globulin</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Immunoglobulin G antibodies</p></td>
<td class="td76n">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypogammaglobulinemia (in CLL, recurrent infections); ITP; primary immunodeficiency states</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">Antithrombin III concentrate (AT III)</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">AT III (trace amounts of other plasma proteins)</p></td>
<td class="td76an">
<p class="tbodyleft">AT III deficiency with or at risk for thrombosis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource"><em><sup><a id="ftt3" href="#iftt3">a</a></sup></em>The composition of each type of blood component is described as well as the most common indications for using a given blood component. RBCs, platelets, and fresh-frozen plasma are the blood products most commonly used. When transfusing these blood products, it is important to realize that the individual product is always &#x201C;contaminated&#x201D; with very small amounts of other blood products (e.g., WBCs mixed in a unit of platelets). This contamination can cause some difficulties, particularly isosensitization, in certain patients.</p>
<p class="tablesource">&#x2191;, increased; &#x2193;, decreased; AHF, antihemophilic factor; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; ITP, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura; IV, intravenous; PRBCs, packed red blood cells; RBCs, red blood cells; WBCs, white blood cells.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from American Red Cross. (2020b). How can one donation help multiple people? Retrieved on 1/15/2020 at: <a href="http://www.redcrossblood.org/faq.html#eligibility">www.redcrossblood.org/faq.html#eligibility</a>; Stowell, C. P. (2019). Transfusion medicine. In M. Laposata (Ed.). <em>Laboratory medicine: Diagnosis of disease in the clinical laboratory</em> (3rd ed., pp. 321&#x2013;348). New York: McGraw-Hill.</p>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>