<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1075">Procuring Blood and Blood Products</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The process of procuring blood and blood products includes donation and processing.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1076">Blood Donation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">To protect both the donor and the recipients, all prospective donors are examined and interviewed before they are allowed to donate their blood. The intent of the interview is to assess the general health status of the donor and to identify risk factors that might harm a recipient of the donor&#x2019;s blood. There is no upper age limit to donation. The American Red Cross (2020c) requires that donors be in good health and meet specific eligibility criteria related to medications and vaccinations, medical conditions and treatments, travel outside the United States, lifestyle and life events, and so on. Detailed information about these criteria is available on the American Red Cross Web site (see the Resources section). Examples of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page898" title="898"></span>these minimal requirements include (American Red Cross, 2020a, 2020d):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Body weight should be at least 50 kg (110 lb) for a standard 450-mL donation.</span></li>
<li><span>Donors must wait at least 8 weeks between whole blood (standard) donations.</span></li>
<li><span>People younger than 17 years require parental consent in some states.</span></li>
<li><span>The oral temperature should not exceed 37.5&#x00B0;C (99.6&#x00B0;F).</span></li>
<li><span>The systolic arterial blood pressure should be 80 to 180 mm Hg, and the diastolic pressure should be 50 to 100 mm Hg.</span></li>
<li><span>The hemoglobin level should be at least 12.5 g/dL.</span></li>
<li><span>The destinations of people who traveled outside the United States and Canada within the past 3 years are reviewed; a waiting period maybe required before a donation is accepted.</span></li>
<li><span>Prospective donors who received a blood transfusion must wait 12 months before a donation is accepted.</span></li>
<li><span>Men who have sexual relations with men must wait 3 months from their last sexual encounter before a donation is accepted.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The American Red Cross follows the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) policy for donors who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer (LGBTQ) and provides support for these individuals through the American Red Cross LGBTQ+ Team Member Resource Group (see Resources section at the end of the chapter).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1077">Directed Donation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">At times, friends and family of a patient wish to donate blood for that person. These blood donations are referred to as directed donations. These donations are not any safer than those provided by random donors, because directed donors may not be as willing to identify themselves as having a history of any of the risk factors that disqualify a person from donating blood. Therefore, many blood centers no longer accept directed donations.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1078">Standard Donation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Phlebotomy consists of venipuncture and blood withdrawal. Standard precautions are used. Donors are placed in a semirecumbent position. The skin over the antecubital fossa is carefully cleansed with an antiseptic preparation, a tourniquet is applied, and venipuncture is performed. Withdrawal of 450 mL of blood usually takes less than 15 minutes. After the needle is removed, donors are asked to hold the involved arm straight up, and firm pressure is applied with sterile gauze for 2 to 3 minutes. A firm bandage is then applied. The donor remains recumbent until they feel able to sit up, usually within a few minutes. Donors who experience weakness or faintness should rest for a longer period. The donor then receives food and fluids and is asked to remain another 15 minutes.</p>
<p class="indent">The donor is instructed to leave the dressing on and to avoid heavy lifting for several hours, to avoid smoking for 1 hour, to avoid drinking alcoholic beverages for 3 hours, to increase fluid intake for 2 days, and to eat healthy meals for at least 2 weeks. Specimens from the donated blood are tested to detect infections and to identify the specific blood type (see later discussion under Blood Processing).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1079">Autologous Donation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A patient&#x2019;s own blood may be collected for future transfusion; this method is useful for many elective surgeries where the potential need for transfusion is high (e.g., orthopedic surgery). Preoperative donations are ideally collected 4 to 6 weeks before surgery. Iron supplements are prescribed during this period to prevent depletion of iron stores. Typically, 1 unit of blood is drawn each week; the number of units obtained varies with the type of surgical procedure to be performed (i.e., the amount of blood anticipated to be transfused). Phlebotomies are not performed within 72 hours of surgery. Individual blood components can also be collected.</p>
<p class="indent">The primary advantage of autologous transfusions is the prevention of viral infections from another person&#x2019;s blood. Other advantages include safe transfusion for patients with a history of transfusion reactions, prevention of alloimmunization, and avoidance of complications in patients with alloantibodies. It is the policy of the American Red Cross that autologous blood is transfused only to the donor. If the blood is not required, it is discarded. The blood is never returned to the general donor supply of blood products to be used by another person (American Red Cross, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Needless autologous donation (i.e., performed when the likelihood of transfusion is small) is discouraged because it is expensive, takes time, and uses resources inappropriately. Moreover, in an emergency situation, the autologous units available may be inadequate, and the patient may still require additional units from the general donor supply. Furthermore, although autologous transfusion can eliminate the risk of viral contamination, the risk of bacterial contamination is the same as that in transfusion from random donors (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2079">Stowell, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Contraindications to donation of blood for autologous transfusion are acute infection, severely debilitating chronic disease, hemoglobin level less than 11 g/dL, unstable angina, and acute cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease. A history of poorly controlled epilepsy may be considered a contraindication in some centers.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1080">Intraoperative Blood Salvage</h5>
<p class="nonindent">This transfusion method provides replacement for patients who cannot donate blood before surgery and for those undergoing vascular, orthopedic, or thoracic surgery. During a surgical procedure, blood lost into a sterile cavity (e.g., hip joint) is suctioned into a cell-saver machine. The whole blood or PRBCs are washed, often with saline solution; filtered; and then returned to the patient as an IV infusion. Salvaged blood cannot be stored, because bacteria cannot be completely removed from the blood and thus cannot be used when it is contaminated with bacteria. The use of intraoperative blood salvage has decreased the need for autologous blood donation but has not affected the need for allogeneic blood products (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2068">Sikorski, Rizkalla, Yang, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1081">Hemodilution</h5>
<p class="nonindent">This transfusion method may be initiated before or after induction of anesthesia. About 1 to 2 units of blood are removed from the patient through a venous or arterial line and simultaneously replaced with a colloid or crystalloid solution. The blood obtained is then reinfused after surgery. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page899" title="899"></span>The advantage of this method is that the patient loses fewer erythrocytes during surgery, because the added IV solutions dilute the concentration of erythrocytes and lower the hematocrit. However, patients who are at risk for myocardial injury should not be further stressed by hemodilution. Hemodilution has been associated with adverse outcomes in patients having cardiopulmonary bypass; it has also been linked to tissue ischemia, particularly in the kidneys (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2055">Hare, Han, Leshchyshyn, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1082">Complications of Blood Donation</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Excessive bleeding at the donor&#x2019;s venipuncture site is sometimes caused by a bleeding disorder but more often results from a technique error: laceration of the vein, excessive tourniquet pressure, or failure to apply enough pressure after the needle is withdrawn.</p>
<p class="indent">Fainting may occur after blood donation and may be related to emotional factors, a vasovagal reaction, or prolonged fasting before donation. Because of the loss of blood volume, hypotension and syncope may occur when the donor assumes an erect position (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2059">John, Theodora, Gloria, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). A donor who appears pale or complains of faintness should immediately lie down or sit with the head lowered below the knees. The donor should be observed for another 30 minutes.</p>
<p class="indent">Anginal chest pain may be precipitated in patients with unsuspected coronary artery disease. Seizures can occur in donors with epilepsy, although the incidence is very low. Both angina and seizures require further medical evaluation and treatment.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1083">Blood Processing</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Samples of the unit of blood are always taken immediately after donation so that the blood can be typed and tested. Each donation is tested for antibodies to human immune deficiency virus (HIV) types 1 and 2, hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc), hepatitis C virus (HCV), human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (anti-HTLV-I/II), hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAG), and syphilis. Negative reactions are required for the blood to be used, and each unit of blood is labeled to certify the results. Nucleic acid amplification testing has increased the ability to detect the presence of HCV, HIV, and West Nile virus infections, because it directly tests for genomic nucleic acids of the viruses rather than for the presence of antibodies to the viruses. This testing significantly shortens the &#x201C;window&#x201D; of inability to detect HIV and HCV from a donated unit, further ensuring the safety of the blood; the risk of transmission of HIV or HCV is now estimated at 1 in 2 million units and 1 in 1.6 million units of blood donated, respectively (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2043">American Cancer Society, 2017</a>). Blood is also screened for cytomegalovirus (CMV). If it tests positive for CMV, it can still be used, except in recipients who are negative for CMV and who are severely immunocompromised; any components are labeled as CMV positive.</p>
<p class="indent">Equally important is accurate determination of the blood type. More than 200 antigens have been identified on the surface of RBC membranes. Of these, the most important for safe transfusion are the ABO and Rh systems. The ABO system identifies which sugars are present on the membrane of a person&#x2019;s erythrocytes: A, B, both A and B, or neither A nor B (type O). To prevent a significant reaction, the same type of PRBCs should be transfused. Previously, it was thought that in an emergency situation in which the patient&#x2019;s blood type was not known, type O blood could be safely transfused. This practice is no longer recommended.</p>
<p class="indent">The Rh antigen (also referred to as D) is present on the surface of erythrocytes in 85% of the population (Rh positive). Those who lack the D antigen are referred to as being Rh negative. PRBCs are routinely tested for the D antigen as well as ABO. Patients should receive PRBCs with a compatible Rh type.</p>
<p class="indent">The majority of transfusion reactions are due to clerical errors, including mislabeling, inaccuracy transcribing orders and incorrect verification of product and patient. When these errors occur, the patient is transfused an incompatible unit of blood product (<a href="c28-sec06.xhtml#bib2079">Stubbs, 2018</a>). Reactions (other than those due to procedural error) are most frequently due to the presence of donor leukocytes within the blood component unit (PRBCs or platelets); the recipient may form antibodies to the antigens present on these leukocytes. PRBC components typically have 1 to 3 &#x00D7; 10<sup>9</sup> leukocytes remaining in each unit. Leukocytes from the blood product are frequently filtered to diminish the likelihood of developing reactions and refractoriness to transfusions, particularly in patients who have long-term transfusion needs. The process of leukocyte filtration renders the blood component &#x201C;leukocyte poor&#x201D; (i.e., leukopoor). Filtration can occur at the time the unit is collected from the donor and processed, which achieves better results but is more expensive, or at the time the blood component is transfused by attaching a leukocyte filter to the blood administration tubing. Many centers advocate routinely using leukopoor filtered blood components for people who have or are likely to develop long-term transfusion requirements.</p>
<p class="indent">When a patient is immunocompromised, as in the case following stem cell transplant, any donor lymphocytes must be removed from the blood components. In this situation, the blood component is exposed to low amounts of radiation (25 Gy) that kill any lymphocytes within the blood component. Irradiated blood products are highly effective in preventing transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease, which is fatal in most cases. Irradiated blood products have a shorter shelf life.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>