<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1175">Acquired Bleeding Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">There are a plethora of acquired bleeding disorders. Common causes include liver disease, vitamin K deficiency, and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1176">Liver Disease</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Excluding factor VIII, most blood coagulation factors are synthesized in the liver. Therefore, liver dysfunction (due to cirrhosis, hepatitis, and tumor) can lead to reduced amounts of the factors needed for coagulation and hemostasis (see <a href="c43.xhtml">Chapter 43</a>). Prolongation of the PT may indicate severe hepatic dysfunction, unless associated with vitamin K deficiency. Patients may experience minor bleeding (e.g., ecchymoses) but are also at risk for significant bleeding, especially after surgery or trauma. Transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma may be needed to replace clotting factors and prevent or stop bleeding. Life-threatening hemorrhage associated with peptic ulcer or esophageal varices may occur. In the event of significant hemorrhage, transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma, PRBCs, and platelets is often necessary.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1177">Vitamin K Deficiency</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Vitamin K is an essential element for synthesis of many coagulation factors. Vitamin K deficiency is often seen in patients who are malnourished. Prolonged use of some antibiotics can reduce the intestinal flora that produce vitamin K, causing depletion of vitamin K stores. Correction of the deficiency can be achieved with oral or subcutaneous administration of vitamin K (phytonadione). Adequate synthesis of coagulation factors is reflected in normalization of the PT.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1178">Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">HIT is a serious complication of heparin-based therapy, a medication commonly prescribed for its anticoagulant effects (see <a href="c26.xhtml">Chapter 26</a> for description of indications for heparin). HIT involves the formation of antibodies against the heparin&#x2013;platelet complex. HIT may occur in as many as 5% of patients receiving heparin (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Brien, 2019</a>). The type of heparin used, the duration of therapy (4 to 14 days), and surgery (especially if cardiopulmonary bypass is used) appear to be risk factors for developing HIT. Bovine heparin preparations are more likely to lead to HIT than porcine preparations; even low&#x2013;molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs) carry risk for HIT. Neither the dose nor the route of administration of heparin is a risk factor. Women appear to be at higher risk and young adults are at low risk for developing this condition. A decline in the platelet count is the hallmark sign that most often develops 5 to 10 days after heparin therapy is initiated; therefore, monitoring the platelet count in patients receiving heparin therapy is essential. The platelet count can drop significantly, typically by 50% of the baseline over a period of 1 to 3 days. Autoantibodies develop that may activate platelets, causing thromboses. After patients with HIT are successfully managed, these autoantibodies typically disappear in 2 to 3 months.</p>
<p class="indent">Affected patients are at increased risk for thrombosis, either venous, arterial, or both, with thromboses that may manifest as deep vein thrombosis (DVT), acute coronary syndrome (ACS), stroke, or thrombosis to major vessels in an extremity, leading to amputation. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the most common manifestation of thrombosis secondary to HIT (i.e., DVT or pulmonary embolism [PE]) (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Brien, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment for HIT includes immediate cessation of heparin (including heparin-coated catheters) and initiation of another form of anticoagulation. If the heparin is discontinued without providing an alternative form of anticoagulation, the patient is at increased risk of developing new thrombi. Argatroban, a thrombin inhibitor, is an FDA-approved anticoagulant for the treatment of HIT. Oral anticoagulation with warfarin is contraindicated because it initially promotes thrombosis in the microvasculature by depletion of protein C. This can lead to tissue ischemia and gangrenous limbs, ultimately resulting in amputation if untreated (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2112">Arepally, 2017</a>).<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page940" title="940"></span> Patients who develop thrombosis in the presence of HIT should receive anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months; in the absence of thrombosis, treatment may be shorter. Patients must be aware that the condition may be reactivated with re-exposure to heparin, even in small amounts, within 3 to 4 months of the diagnosis (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Arepally, 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>