<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1150">Thrombocytopenia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Thrombocytopenia (low platelet level) can result from a variety of factors, including reduced production of platelets in the bone marrow, increased destruction of platelets, or increased consumption of platelets (e.g., the use of platelets for clot formation). Causes and treatments are summarized in <a href="c29-sec09.xhtml#tt29-3">Table 29-3</a>.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1151">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bleeding and petechiae rarely occur with platelet counts greater than 50,000/mm<sup>3</sup>, but excessive bleeding can occur after surgery or other trauma. When platelet counts fall to 20,000/mm<sup>3</sup> or less, petechiae may occur. Additionally, nasal and gingival bleeding, excessive menstrual bleeding, and excessive bleeding from surgery or dental extractions can occur. Spontaneous and potentially fatal bleeding in the CNS or GI tract can occur when platelet counts fall to less than 5000/mm<sup>3</sup>. If platelet function is abnormal as a result of disease (e.g., MDS) or medications (e.g., aspirin) the risk of bleeding may be much greater even when the platelet count is mildly reduced.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1152">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are used to identify platelet deficiency associated with decreased production. A number of genetic causes of thrombocytopenia have been identified. Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked mutations are among such disorders. When platelet destruction is the cause of thrombocytopenia, the bone marrow shows increased megakaryocytes and normal or increased platelet production as the body attempts to compensate for the decreased platelets in the circulation. Screening for hepatitis B or C, which can cause thrombocytopenia, should be done.</p>
<p class="indent">An important cause to exclude is pseudothrombocytopenia. Platelets aggregate and clump in the presence of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), the anticoagulant present in the tube used for CBC collection. This clumping can be seen 0.8% to 1.25% of the population. Manual examination of the peripheral smear can easily detect platelet clumping as the cause of thrombocytopenia. Redrawing the blood in a tube anticoagulated with citrate rather than EDTA, followed by rapid analysis of the platelet count can provide a more accurate count.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1153">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Secondary thrombocytopenia is usually managed with treatment of the underlying disease. If platelet production is impaired, platelet transfusion may be needed to increase the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page933" title="933"></span>platelet count and stop bleeding or prevent spontaneous hemorrhage. If excessive platelet destruction occurs, transfused platelets may also be destroyed. The most common cause of increased platelet destruction is immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) (see the following discussion). In some circumstances, splenectomy may be a therapeutic intervention, but it is not always feasible. For example, when an enlarged spleen is associated with portal hypertension related to cirrhosis, splenectomy may cause further issues with bleeding.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1154">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">When determining nursing interventions, the nurse considers the cause of the thrombocytopenia, the likely duration, and overall condition of the patient. Education is an important intervention to promote safety and should include fall prevention, particularly for older adults and those who are frail. Interventions for patients with secondary thrombocytopenia are the same as those for a patient with cancer who is at risk for bleeding (see <a href="c12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>