<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1133">Hereditary Hemochromatosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hereditary hemochromatosis is a genetic condition characterized by excess iron absorption from the GI tract. Normally, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page928" title="928"></span>the GI tract absorbs 1 to 2 mg of iron daily, but in those with hereditary hemochromatosis, this rate is significantly increased. The excess iron is deposited in various organs, especially the liver, skin, and pancreas; and less frequently, the heart, testes, and thyroid gland. Eventually, affected organs become dysfunctional. Although hereditary hemochromatosis is diagnosed in 1% to 6% of the U.S. population, the actual prevalence is unknown because it is not always recognized. The genetic defect associated with hemochromatosis is most commonly seen as a specific mutation (C282Y homozygosity) of the <em>HFE</em> gene. Despite the high prevalence of the genetic mutation, the actual expression of the disease is much lower; the reason for this discrepancy is not clear. The prevalence of hemochromatosis is lower in Asian Americans, African Americans, Latinos, and Pacific Islanders and higher in people of European descent (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2147">Kowdley, Brown, Ahn, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). Women are less often affected than men because women lose iron through menses.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1134">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Tissue damage is seldom evident until middle age because the accumulation of iron in body organs occurs gradually. Symptoms of weakness, lethargy, arthralgia, and weight loss are common and occur earlier in the course of the disease. The skin may appear hyperpigmented or bronze in color from melanin deposits and <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hemosiderin:&lt;/b&gt; iron-containing pigment derived from the breakdown of hemoglobin">hemosiderin</button></strong>, an iron-containing pigment. Cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy can occur, with resulting dyspnea and edema. Endocrine dysfunction can be manifested as hypothyroidism, diabetes, and hypogonadism with testicular atrophy, diminished libido, and impotence. Cirrhosis is common in later stages of the disease, shortens life expectancy, and is a risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2147">Kowdley et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1135">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnostic laboratory findings include an elevated serum ferritin and high serum transferrin saturation. CBC values are often normal. The definitive diagnostic test for hemochromatosis was formerly a liver biopsy but that test has been replaced by testing for the associated genetic mutation. While the prevalence of the genetic mutation is high (1 in 200 to 300 in persons of Northern European descent) few people with the gene will actually develop sufficient iron overload to cause symptoms and organ dysfunction (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Bacon, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1136">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Therapy often involves the removal of excess iron with therapeutic phlebotomy (removal of whole blood via venipuncture). Each unit of blood removed results in a decrease of 200 to 250 mg of iron. Initial treatment typically involves weekly removal of one unit of whole blood. As the ferritin level decreases, the frequency of phlebotomy can be decreased. The goal is to maintain an iron saturation between 10% and 50% and a serum ferritin level of less than 100 mcg/L (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Ganz, 2016</a>). Evaluation of iron studies should be repeated regularly and phlebotomy resumed when the ferritin level rises. CBCs and iron panel tests should be performed at regular intervals during treatment to ensure that the patient is not becoming anemic. If moderate anemia occurs, a delay in phlebotomy is often adequate to correct the problem. Aggressive removal of excess iron can prevent organ dysfunction and the complications associated with organ damage. Fatigue, skin pigmentation changes, and fibrosis are partially reversed by achieving and maintaining normal ferritin levels. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma includes monitoring alpha-fetoprotein levels and serial abdominal ultrasounds (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2147">Kowdley et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1137">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with hemochromatosis frequently limit their iron intake; however, this is not typically effective as lone therapy. They should be advised to avoid taking additional iron supplements. Vitamin C supplementation should also be limited because it enhances iron absorption. Patients with hemochromatosis must be careful to avoid substances that might impair liver function including excessive alcohol ingestion. Other body systems should be monitored for evidence of organ dysfunction, particularly the endocrine and cardiac systems, so that appropriate interventions can be initiated without delay. Children of patients who are homozygous for the <em>HFE</em> gene mutation should be screened for the mutation. Patients who are heterozygous for the gene do not develop the disease but should be advised that they may transmit the gene to their children.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>