<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1139">Secondary Polycythemia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Secondary polycythemia is caused by excessive production of erythropoietin. This may occur in response to a reduced amount of oxygen, which acts as a stimulus for production. Heavy smoking, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), severe heart disease, or conditions such as living at high altitudes or exposure to low levels of carbon monoxide may be responsible for increased erythropoietin production. Certain hemoglobinopathies (e.g., hemoglobin Chesapeake), in which the hemoglobin has a high affinity for oxygen, or genetic mutations that cause abnormally high erythropoietin levels may also increase erythropoiesis (Prchal, 2016b). Secondary polycythemia can also occur from certain neoplasms that stimulate erythropoietin production (e.g., renal cell carcinoma), excessive use of exogenous erythropoietin, and androgen use.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1140">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">When secondary polycythemia is mild, treatment may not be necessary. When treatment is necessary, however, it involves <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page929" title="929"></span>treating the primary condition. If the cause cannot be corrected (e.g., treatment of OSA or improving function with smoking cessation), therapeutic phlebotomy may be needed for symptom management and to reduce blood viscosity and volume. Therapeutic phlebotomy is not indicated when the cause for the elevated RBC count is an appropriate response to tissue hypoxia (Prchal, 2016b).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>