<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1192">Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Antibodies to phospholipids are common causes of thrombophilia; up to 5% of the general population may have this disorder. These antibodies reduce levels of annexin V, a protein that binds to phospholipids and has anticoagulant activity. The most common of the antiphospholipid antibodies are lupus and anticardiolipin antibodies, or an antibody to beta-2 glycoprotein (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Rand &#x0026; Wolgast, 2016</a>). Antiphospholipid antibody syndromes are classified as primary or secondary, with a reaction secondary to a preexisting autoimmune disease, with systemic lupus erythematosus being most frequently implicated. Primary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is associated with a number of infections including hepatitis C, HIV, syphilis and malaria as well as certain medications (e.g., antibiotics, quinine, hydralazine, procainamide); a genetic predisposition to this syndrome has been postulated but has not been proven. Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with multiple miscarriages and are strongly associated with stroke (<a href="c29-sec24.xhtml#bib2196">Heuser &#x0026; Branch, 2019</a>). Most thromboses are venous, but arterial thrombosis is also possible in up to one third of patients with this syndrome. Recurrent thromboses tend to occur in the same fashion, with recurrent venous thrombosis after an initial venous presentation and recurrent arterial thromboses after an initial arterial thrombosis. Thrombi typically occur in large vessels. Therapy varies depending on the type of syndrome (e.g., secondary forms caused by autoimmune disorders may be treated with immunosuppressive therapy), history of prior thrombosis, and location of the thrombus (venous or arterial). Arterial thrombosis is often treated by adding low-dose aspirin to some form of heparin therapy (see later discussion).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>