<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1218">MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES (MDSs)</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The MDSs are a group of clonal disorders of the myeloid stem cell that cause dysplasia (abnormal development) in one or more types of cell lines. These disorders commonly result in cytopenias (low blood cell counts), with the tendency to develop into acute leukemia (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Sockel &#x0026; Platzbecker, 2018</a>). A common feature of MDS is anemia due to dysplasia of the erythrocytes, although leukocytes (particularly neutrophils) and platelets can also be affected. Although the bone marrow is actually hypercellular, many of the cells within it die before being released into the circulation. Therefore, the actual number of cells in the circulation is typically lower than normal. In MDS, the affected cells do not function normally. The neutrophils have diminished ability to destroy bacteria by <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;phagocytosis:&lt;/b&gt; process of cellular ingestion and digestion of foreign bodies">phagocytosis</button></strong> (cellular ingestion and digestion of foreign bodies); platelets are less able to aggregate and are less adhesive than usual. The result of these defects is an increased risk of infection and bleeding, even when the actual number of circulating cells may not be excessively low.</p>
<p class="indent">This disease is primarily seen in older adults (median age at diagnosis is 65 to 70 years), is idiopathic in nature due to HSC damage, and occurs more often in males than females (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Montalban-Bravo &#x0026; Garcia-Manero, 2017</a>; <a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Sockel &#x0026; Platzbecker, 2018</a>). In addition, about 10% to 15% of patients will <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page963" title="963"></span>develop MDS following exposure to alkylating agents, radiotherapy, or chemicals (e.g., benzene), and/or have an inherited genetic disorder, such as Fanconi anemia or trisomy 21 (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Sockel &#x0026; Platzbecker, 2018</a>). Genetic syndromes account for about 50% of cases (e.g., Down syndrome, trisomy 8 syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1) (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019d; NCCN, 2019e).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1219">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The manifestations of MDS can vary widely. Some patients are asymptomatic, with the illness being discovered incidentally when a CBC is performed for other purposes. Other patients have profound symptoms and complications from the illness. Because MDS tends to occur in older adults, other concurrent chronic health conditions may exacerbate symptoms associated with the disease. Fatigue is often present, with varying levels of intensity and frequency. Neutrophil dysfunction puts the patient at risk for recurrent pneumonias and other infections. Because platelet function can also be altered, bleeding can occur. These problems may persist in a fairly steady state for months, even years. Over time, the marrow may fail to provide enough cells despite support with transfusion or growth factors; this is called <em>bone marrow failure.</em> MDS may also progress over time; as the dysplasia evolves into a leukemic state, the complications increase in severity. However, it is important to note that the majority of patients with MDS succumb to complications from the disease itself or from other comorbidities, and not to those from acute leukemia (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019d).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1220">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The CBC typically reveals a macrocytic anemia; leukocyte and platelet counts may be diminished as well. Other potential causes for cytopenia, which may include vitamin deficiencies, viral infection, GI bleeding, autoimmune disease, splenomegaly, and liver dysfunction, should be excluded. Serum erythropoietin levels may be variable and the <strong>reticulocyte</strong> count (immature RBCs) may be inappropriately low. The presence of blast cells on the CBC may be indicative of disease progression to acute leukemia. To help rule out other causes of anemia, other laboratory studies may include folate, serum vitamin B<sub>12</sub>, ferritin, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), iron, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).</p>
<p class="indent">The official diagnosis of MDS is based on the results of a bone marrow aspiration (to assess dysplasia) and biopsy (to assess characteristics of the affected cells). These tests help in determining prognosis, risk of leukemic transformation, and in some patients, the most effective therapy (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Montalban-Bravo &#x0026; Garcia-Manero, 2017</a>); thus, the nurse must understand the risk stratification category of each patient. Those patients with low-risk disease have a much longer survival (as much as 10 years) compared with untreated patients with high-risk disease (where survival is usually less than 9 months) (NCCN, 2019e) (see <a href="c28.xhtml">Chapter 28</a> for discussion of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1221">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical management strategies for MDS are based on risk stratification to determine stage of disease and prognosis. The most commonly used tool is the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) that evaluates cytopenia, transfusion needs, percent of blast cells in the bone marrow, and cytogenetic characteristics (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Montalban-Bravo &#x0026; Garcia-Manero, 2017</a>). Most patients with MDSs are diagnosed as having low-risk disease; for these patients, the objective of therapy is to maintain or restore quality of life, improve cytopenia, and decrease transfusion requirements. Some patients with mild symptoms may only require periodic monitoring of laboratory studies indicative of hematologic function (e.g., CBC, reticulocyte count, folate, ferritin, iron). Approximately two thirds of patients diagnosed as low risk have cytopenic-related complications at the time of diagnosis, however, and may require blood transfusions and/or an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients who are at low to intermediate risk and transfusion dependent are typically treated with a hypomethylating agent (e.g., azacitidine, decitabine). These agents work by inhibiting the abnormal genes regulating methylation, promoting tumor suppression genes, and permitting myeloid differentiation within the bone marrow (NCCN, 2019e). Neither drug has been shown to modify the natural trajectory of low-risk MDS; therefore, hypomethylating agents are not typically used until erythroid-stimulating agents are no longer effective in controlling transfusion dependence (NCCN, 2019e). These agents can improve cytopenia, reduce transfusion requirements, reduce the likelihood of transformation to AML, and improve overall survival.</p>
<p class="indent">For the patient at high risk the goals of therapy are to delay leukemic transformation and prolong life expectancy (NCCN, 2019e; Sockel &#x0026; Platzbecker, 2018). Allogeneic HSCT continues to be the only potential option of cure for MDS, but is not often a viable option for most patients, as many are of advanced age with significant comorbidities. Allogeneic HSCT is recommended for patients who have hypoplastic MDS, are younger, or those who have not responded satisfactorily to other treatment options (Montalban-Bravo &#x0026; Garcia-Manero, 2017; NCCN, 2019e).</p>
<p class="indent">Lenalidomide (a thalidomide analog) is the standard of care for patients with the chromosomal abnormality deletion 5q, are considered low risk, and are not thrombocytopenic (NCCN, 2019e). Treatment with lenalidomide may cause neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, which may necessitate treatment delays or dose reduction (NCCN, 2019e). Other immunosuppressive therapies that have shown some efficacy in the treatment of MDS are antithymocyte globulin (ATG), with or without cyclosporine, and corticosteroids. These agents are used in a subset of patients with MDS who have weakened immune responses (e.g., have neutropenia) (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2261">Montalban-Bravo &#x0026; Garcia-Manero, 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients frequently need repeated transfusions (PRBCs, platelets, or both) throughout the illness trajectory to maintain adequate hemoglobin and platelet levels (termed <em>transfusion dependence</em>). Attempts to improve anemia and decrease RBC transfusion are often successful with the use of erythroid-stimulating agents (epoetin alfa or darbopoetin alfa). Higher-than-normal doses may be required to achieve an adequate improvement in hemoglobin. Adding myeloid growth factors such as G-CSF or GM-CSF can boost responsiveness to these agents (NCCN, 2019e). The median duration of response <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page964" title="964"></span>to this therapy is 2 years; transfusion requirements typically increase by this point.</p>
<p class="indent">Thrombocytopenia is a challenge to manage among patients with MDS. Severe thrombocytopenia is difficult to manage because patients can quickly develop refractoriness to platelet transfusions due to alloimmunization (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019d). Moreover, bleeding can develop even when the platelet level is not excessively low, due to poor platelet function. The cause of thrombocytopenia appears to be increased apoptosis and premature marrow destruction of the platelets prior to their release into the circulation (NCCN, 2019e). The recombinant thrombopoietin receptor agonists romiplostim and eltrombopag have been developed to stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of megakaryocytes into platelets within the bone marrow. Both drugs have demonstrated the ability to significantly raise platelet counts in this population, but their duration of action may not be long. Increased rates of marrow fibrosis and AML evolution seem to be ameliorated by discontinuing the drug, but additional study is needed (NCCN, 2019e).</p>
<p class="indent">Iron overload is another significant problem for patients with MDS, especially in patients who routinely receive PRBC transfusions (transfusion dependent). Surplus iron is deposited in cells within the reticuloendothelial system, and later in parenchymal organs (e.g., liver). While a true cause-and-effect has not yet been established, there is significant concern that patients with transfusion-dependent MDS are at high risk for developing cardiac disorders, particularly heart failure, as well as hepatic and endocrine dysfunction (NCCN, 2019e). Excess iron, and the resultant increased oxidative stress, is also associated with pancreatic dysfunction, the development of diabetes, increased rates of infection, and decreased hematopoiesis.</p>
<p class="indent">To prevent or reverse the complications of iron overload, iron chelation therapy is commonly implemented. Patients with preexisting liver disease, including cirrhosis, should not receive oral iron chelators. There are studies that have found that iron overload may play a role in increased mortality and morbidity in early-stage MDS due to hepatic, cardiac, and endocrine dysfunction (NCCN, 2019e). It is recommended that all patients with MDS who have regular transfusion needs have serum ferritin levels along with the number of PRBC transfusions routinely monitored to determine iron stores and possible overload. The ferritin level should be maintained at less than 1000 mcg/L. Iron is bound to the chelating agent and then excreted in the urine. Because chelation therapy removes only a small amount of iron with each treatment, patients with chronic iron overload from RBC transfusions need to continue chelation therapy as long as the iron overload exists. Oral iron chelation with deferasirox has replaced the need for the former standard therapy, which consisted of subcutaneous infusions of deferoxamine. However, adherence remains a challenge, largely due to toxicity associated with the drug.</p>
<p class="indent">Infection rates are high among patients with MDS, who frequently require hospitalization. Severe neutropenia, coexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or autoimmune disease, and history of other malignancy are associated with higher risk for developing infection, whereas the extent of thrombocytopenia, age, MDS therapy, or diabetes are not (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019d; NCCN, 2019e). Pneumonia is the most common type of infection in this patient population; bacteria (both gram negative and gram positive) are the predominant pathogens.</p>
<p class="indent">The administration of myeloid growth factors alone may be useful in some patients with infections and severe neutropenia, but they are not typically used to prevent infection. Prophylactic antibiotics are not routinely used so that resistant organisms do not develop, but prompt initiation of antimicrobial therapy is crucial at the onset of infection to diminish the risk of increased mortality.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1222">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Caring for patients with MDS can be challenging because the illness is unpredictable. As with other hematologic disorders, some patients (especially those with no symptoms) have difficulty perceiving that they have a serious illness that can place them at risk for life-threatening complications. At the other extreme, many patients have tremendous difficulty coping with the uncertain trajectory of the illness and fear that the illness will evolve into AML. Thus, it is important for patients to understand their unique risk of the disease transforming to AML and to recognize that, for most patients, MDS is a chronic illness. It is imperative that the nurse recognizes any concurrent health problems the patient may have. This knowledge will help the nurse better plan and manage the patient&#x2019;s care. For example, a patient with underlying heart failure or COPD may not tolerate anemia well, nor a more rapid rate of red blood cell transfusion.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with MDS need extensive education about infection risk, measures to avoid it, signs and symptoms of developing infection, and appropriate actions to take should such symptoms occur. Education should also be provided regarding the risk of bleeding. Patients need to be encouraged to serve as their own health advocate, by informing other health care providers, including dentists, that they have MDS, and their risks for infection and bleeding. Patients with MDS who are hospitalized may require neutropenic precautions.</p>
<p class="indent">Fatigue is often a debilitating symptom for the patient with MDS and significantly interferes with quality of life. It can impair the patient&#x2019;s ability to function in the work or home setting and to engage in meaningful activities, and affect the patient&#x2019;s overall cognitive function (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019d; NCCN, 2019e). Patients may benefit from anticipatory guidance in learning how to live with this symptom, and creative strategies may be required.</p>
<p class="indent">Laboratory values need to be monitored closely to anticipate the need for transfusion and to determine response to treatment with growth factors. Patients with chronic transfusion requirements often benefit from the insertion of a vascular access device for this purpose. Those patients receiving chemotherapy need extensive education regarding treatment side effects (and how to manage them) and treatment schedules. Patients receiving growth factors need education about these medications, administration schedules, and side effects.</p>
<p class="indent">Chelation therapy is a process that is used to remove excess iron acquired from chronic transfusions. Side effects <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page965" title="965"></span>from oral chelators commonly include diarrhea and abdominal cramping. Educating the patient to take the medication in the evening prior to dinner and gradually increasing the dosage over time may diminish these side effects. Skin rash is usually mild and rarely warrants temporarily stopping the drug. Monitoring renal function is important as a rise in serum creatinine is common. The dosage should be reduced if the serum creatinine rises by more than one third of baseline. Patients with preexisting liver disease, including cirrhosis, should not receive oral iron chelators.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>