<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1197">LEUKEMIA</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The term <em>leukocytosis</em> refers to an increase of leukocytes (WBCs) in the circulation. Typically, only one specific cell type is increased. Because the proportions of several types of leukocytes (e.g., eosinophils, basophils, monocytes) are small, an increase in other types can be great enough to elevate the total leukocyte count, particularly the neutrophils or lymphocytes. Although leukocytosis can be a normal response to increased need (e.g., in acute infection), the elevation in leukocytes should decrease as the physiologic need decreases. A prolonged or progressively increasing elevation in leukocytes is abnormal and should be evaluated. A significant cause of persistent leukocytosis is a hematologic malignancy (i.e., leukemia).</p>
<p class="indent">The common feature of the leukemias is an unregulated proliferation of leukocytes in the bone marrow. In acute forms (or late stages of chronic forms), the proliferation of leukemic cells leaves little room for normal cell production. There can also be a proliferation of cells in the liver and spleen (extramedullary hematopoiesis). With acute forms, there can be infiltration of leukemic cells in other organs, such as the meninges, lymph nodes, gums, and skin. The cause of leukemia is not fully known, but exposure to radiation or chemicals, certain genetic disorders, and viral infections are known to be risk factors for certain types of leukemia. Bone marrow damage from pelvic radiation or certain types of chemotherapy drugs can cause acute leukemia, typically occurring years after treatment for another malignancy (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2018b).</p>
<p class="indent">The leukemias are commonly classified according to the stem cell line involved, either <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;lymphoid:&lt;/b&gt; pertaining to lymphocytes">lymphoid</button></strong> (referring to stem cells that produce lymphocytes) or <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;myeloid:&lt;/b&gt; pertaining to nonlymphoid blood cells that differentiate into RBCs, platelets, macrophages, mast cells, and various WBCs">myeloid</button></strong> (referring to stem cells that produce nonlymphoid blood cells). They are also classified as either acute or chronic, based on the time it takes for symptoms to evolve and the phase of cell development that is halted (i.e., with few leukocytes differentiating beyond that phase).</p>
<p class="indent">In acute leukemia, the onset of symptoms is abrupt, often occurring within a few weeks. Leukocyte development is halted at the blast phase, and thus most leukocytes are undifferentiated cells or blasts. Acute leukemia can progress rapidly, with death occurring within weeks to months without aggressive treatment.</p>
<p class="indent">In chronic leukemia, symptoms evolve over a period of months to years, and the majority of leukocytes produced are mature. Chronic leukemia progresses more slowly; the disease trajectory can extend for years.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>