<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1204">Chronic Myeloid Leukemia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) arises from a mutation in the myeloid stem cell. Normal myeloid cells continue to be produced, but there is a pathologic increase in the production of forms of blast cells. Therefore, a wide spectrum of cell types exists within the blood, from blast forms to mature neutrophils. Because there is an uncontrolled proliferation of cells, the marrow expands into the cavities of long bones, such as the femur, and cells are also formed in the liver and spleen (extramedullary hematopoiesis), resulting in enlargement of these organs that is sometimes painful.</p>
<p class="indent">CML results from a chromosomal translocation, where a section of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is shifted from chromosome 22 to chromosome 9, forming what is known as a &#x201C;fusion gene&#x201D; that is abnormal. The specific fused gene found in all patients with CML is the <em>BCR-ABL</em> gene, which occurs when the <em>BCR</em> gene from chromosome 22 switches places with the <em>ABL</em> gene from chromosome 9 (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019b). Normally, the <em>ABL</em> gene signals the cells when to make tyrosine kinase; however, the abnormal <em>BCR-ABL</em> gene (known as the Philadelphia chromosome) signals cells to produce too many leukocytes and is responsible for converting normal cells into leukemic cells.</p>
<p class="indent">CML accounts for 15% of all new cases of leukemia (NCCN, 2019b). The average age of a patient at time of diagnosis is 67 years, but CML can occur at any age. Risk factors include increasing age, being male, having a history of smoking, and being exposed to high doses of radiation (e.g., atomic bomb survivors).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1205">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The clinical picture of CML varies, based upon phase of disease. There are three stages in CML that include chronic, accelerated, and blast crisis (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019b). During the chronic phase, patients have few symptoms, leukocytosis is detected by a CBC performed for some other reason, and complications from the disease itself are rare.</p>
<p class="indent">The accelerated phase can be insidious or rapid; it marks the process of evolution (or transformation) to the acute form of leukemia (blast crisis). In the accelerated phase of disease, blood counts begin to worsen, new chromosomal changes may be seen on analysis, and symptoms consistent with leukemia may start to appear, such as fatigue, anemia, splenomegaly, or dyspnea (NCCN, 2019b). The patient may complain of bone pain and may report fevers (without any obvious sign of infection) and weight loss.</p>
<p class="indent">Blast crisis or blast phase of CML is the most advanced phase. Patients in this phase exhibit signs and symptoms that are more like AML than a chronic disease. Some patients present with leukocytosis, with the WBC count exceeding 100,000/mm&#x00B3; (NCCN, 2019b). Patients with extremely high leukocyte counts may be dyspneic or slightly confused because of decreased perfusion to the lungs and brain from leukostasis (the excessive volume of leukocytes inhibits blood flow through the capillaries). The patient may have an enlarged, tender spleen, and occasionally the liver may also be enlarged and tender. Some patients have insidious symptoms, such as malaise, anorexia, and weight loss. Lymphadenopathy is uncommon, but if present, indicates late disease and a poor prognosis (NCCN, 2019b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1206">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goal of treatment for CML is to control the disease, either by obtaining remission or by keeping the patient in the chronic phase for as long as possible. CML is not considered to be curable among older adults despite advances in understanding the pathophysiology of the disease and the advent of new agents. However, the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has significantly improved treatment and long-term survival for patients with CML (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019b). Medical management is based upon the patient&#x2019;s age, general health, calculation of risk-score (based upon stage of disease and prognosis), and phase of disease.</p>
<p class="indent">TKIs work by blocking the signals within the leukemic cells that express the <em>BCR-ABL</em> protein. This inhibition prevents a series of chemical reactions that cause the cells to grow and divide, thus inducing complete remission at the cellular level. The TKI imatinib mesylate is considered to be standard of care for patients with CML. Newer, alternative TKIs approved for first-line (primary) therapy for patients in the chronic phase of CML include dasatinib or nilotinib (NCCN, 2019b). Each of these TKIs has a different toxicity profile. For example, periorbital edema is common with long-term use of imatinib; dasatinib is very myelosuppressive, and its use carries a significant risk for pleural effusion and for causing a prolonged QT interval; and nilotinib has cardiotoxic effects. Other TKIs approved for second-line therapy (when patients do not respond satisfactorily to the first-line agents) are bosutinib and ponatinib. All TKIs are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 pathway, which means that drug-to-drug interactions are common. Drugs that may decrease the effects of the TKI are corticosteroids, antiseizure medications, antacids, and St. John&#x2019;s wort. Drugs that may increase the effects of the TKI include grapefruit juice, certain antibiotics (e.g., clarithromycin), and azole antifungals (e.g., clotrimazole, ketoconazole).</p>
<p class="indent">CML is a disease that can potentially be cured with allogeneic HSCT in otherwise healthy patients who are younger than 65 years. However, with the development of TKIs, the timing of transplant has come into question. Approximately 90% of patients who receive allogeneic HSCT during the chronic phase of CML are disease free for 5 years or more (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2019b).</p>
<p class="indent">In the acute form of CML (blast crisis), treatment may resemble induction therapy for acute leukemia, using the same medications as for AML or acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL; see later discussion). Patients whose disease evolves into a &#x201C;lymphoid&#x201D; blast crisis are more likely to be able to reenter <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page956" title="956"></span>a chronic phase after induction therapy. For those whose disease evolves into AML, therapy has been largely ineffective in achieving a second chronic phase. Life-threatening infections and bleeding occur frequently in this phase.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1207">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Most TKIs are oral agents; therefore, their effectiveness is dependent upon the patient&#x2019;s ability and motivation to adhere to the prescribed treatment regimen. These drugs may cause side effects that the patient may find difficult to manage, such as fatigue, asthenia (weakness), pruritus (itching), headache, skin rash, and oropharyngeal pain. A study conducted in Germany of patients with CML treated on an outpatient basis revealed an adherence rate of 51% to oral TKIs (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2215">Hefner, Csef, &#x0026; Kunzmann, 2017</a>), which is consistent with prior studies. In this study, forgetting to take the drug or delays of 2 or more hours from the prescribed time were the most common reported reasons for decreased adherence. Another study examining challenges to oral agent adherence conducted by Gborogen and Polek (2018) reported that over half of nurse participants reported nonadherence to oral agents among their patients. Reasons for nonadherence ranged from patient forgetfulness to perceptions of inadequate support. It is extremely important for the nurse to educate the patient about the medication regimen, how to manage side effects, drug interactions, and safe handling (<a href="c30-sec15.xhtml#bib2197">Olsen et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>) (see Nursing Interventions in <a href="c30-sec05.xhtml#tt30-1">Table 30-1</a>). The nurse should also monitor the patient for adverse signs and symptoms of therapy, such as decreased urinary output, changes in the electrocardiogram (ECG; TKIs can cause arrhythmias and prolonged QT intervals), and myelosuppression (e.g., fevers, chills, changes in the CBC).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>