<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page950" title="950"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 30</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Management of Patients with&#x00A0;Hematologic Neoplasms</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Compare and contrast the different types of leukemias in terms of their incidence, physiologic alterations, clinical manifestations, complications, and medical and nursing management.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient with acute leukemia.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain the differences between the various myeloproliferative disorders in terms of their incidence, physiologic alterations, clinical manifestations, complications, and medical and nursing management.</span></li>
<li><span>Compare and contrast Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas in terms of their incidence, physiologic alterations, clinical manifestations, complications, and medical and nursing management.</span></li>
<li><span>Discuss medical and nursing care of the patient with multiple myeloma.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Cellular Regulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Clotting</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">absolute neutrophil count (ANC):</span> a calculation of the number of circulating neutrophils, derived from the total white blood cells (WBCs) and the percentage of neutrophils counted in a microscope&#x2019;s visual field</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">angiogenesis:</span> formation of new blood vessels</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">apoptosis:</span> programmed cell death</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">blast cells:</span> immature leukocytes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">clone:</span> proliferation from same cell of origin so that descendent cells are identical to the cell of origin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">cytokines:</span> proteins produced by leukocytes that are vital to regulation of hematopoiesis, apoptosis, and immune responses; also called <em>biochemical</em> or <em>inflammatory mediators</em></p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR):</span> laboratory test that measures the rate of settling of red blood cells (RBCs); elevation is indicative of inflammation; also called the <em>sed rate</em></p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">erythromelalgia:</span> a burning, painful sensation and erythema in the fingers or toes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hematopoiesis:</span> complex process of the formation and maturation of blood cells</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">indolent:</span> when in reference to a neoplasm refers to a slow-growing cancer that often remains localized or causes few symptoms</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">leukemia:</span> uncontrolled proliferation of WBCs, often immature</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">lymphadenopathy:</span> enlargement of a lymph node or lymph nodes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">lymphoid:</span> pertaining to lymphocytes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">myeloid:</span> pertaining to nonlymphoid blood cells that differentiate into RBCs, platelets, macrophages, mast cells, and various WBCs</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">neutropenia:</span> lower-than-normal number of neutrophils</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">pancytopenia:</span> abnormal decrease in WBCs, RBCs, and platelets</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">petechiae:</span> tiny capillary hemorrhages</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">phagocytosis:</span> process of cellular ingestion and digestion of foreign bodies</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">reticulocytes:</span> slightly immature RBCs, usually only 1% of total circulating RBCs</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">splenomegaly:</span> enlargement of the spleen</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">stem cell:</span> primitive cell, capable of self-replication and differentiation into myeloid or lymphoid stem cell</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">thrombocythemia:</span> higher-than-normal platelet count that occurs without a known cause</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">thrombocytopenia:</span> lower-than-normal platelet count</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">thrombocytosis:</span> higher-than-normal platelet count that results because of a disease or disorder</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 950</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page951" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="951">p. 951</span></div>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hematopoiesis:&lt;/b&gt; complex process of the formation and maturation of blood cells">Hematopoiesis</button></strong> is the process by which all blood cells develop, differentiate, and mature. This process starts with the hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in the bone marrow. As these <strong>stem cells</strong> divide, they are delineated into one of two cell pathways, to become lymphoid or myeloid progenitor cells. The myeloid stem cells then differentiate into red blood cells, white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets, while the lymphoid stem cells differentiate into B and T lymphocytes. Normally, the differentiation of these progenitor cells is regulated according to the body&#x2019;s need. However, when the mechanisms that control the production of these cells is disrupted or impaired, the cells can proliferate uncontrollably, leading to the development of a hematologic malignancy. The pathophysiologic processes for the development of hematologic malignancies are complex. Understanding these processes and the rationale for treatments is important so that nurses may appropriately assess, monitor, educate, and intervene with patients with hematologic neoplasms.</p>
<p class="indent">Hematopoietic malignancies are classified by the specific blood cells involved. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;leukemia:&lt;/b&gt; uncontrolled proliferation of WBCs">Leukemia</button></strong> is a neoplastic proliferation of a particular cell type (granulocytes, lymphocytes, or infrequently erythrocytes or megakaryocytes). This proliferation leads to an overcrowding in the bone marrow resulting in impaired hematopoietic cell function and can affect other organs in the body (i.e., lymph nodes, skin, and spleen) (Leukemia &#x0026; Lymphoma Society, 2018b). The defect originates in the HSC, the myeloid, or the lymphoid stem cell. Lymphomas are neoplasms of lymphoid tissue, usually derived from B lymphocytes. Multiple myeloma is a malignancy of the most mature form of B lymphocyte&#x2014;the plasma cell.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>