<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1262">Advances in Immunology</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Important developments in immunology revolve around advances in genetic engineering, use of stem cells, and immunotherapy treatments.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1263">Genetic Engineering</h5>
<p class="nonindent">One of the more remarkable evolving technologies is <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;genetic engineering:&lt;/b&gt; emerging technology designed to enable replacement of missing or defective genes">genetic engineering</button></strong>, which uses recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) technology. Two facets of this technology exist. The first permits scientists to combine genes from one type of organism with genes of a second organism. This type of technology allows cells and microorganisms to manufacture proteins, monokines, and lymphokines, which can alter and enhance immune system function. The second facet of recombinant DNA technology involves gene therapy. If a specific gene is abnormal or missing, experimental recombinant DNA technology may be capable of restoring normal gene function. For example, a recombinant gene is inserted into a virus particle. When the virus particle splices its genes, the virus automatically inserts the missing gene and theoretically corrects the genetic anomaly. Extensive research into recombinant DNA technology and gene therapy is ongoing (<a href="c31-sec04.xhtml#bib2279">Gon&#x00E7;alves &#x0026; Paiva, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1264">Stem Cells</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Stem cells are capable of self-renewal and differentiation; they continually replenish the body&#x2019;s entire supply of both RBCs and WBCs. Some stem cells, described as totipotent cells, have tremendous capacity to self-renew and differentiate. Embryonic stem cells, described as pluripotent, give rise to numerous cell types that are able to form tissues. Research has shown that stem cells can restore an immune system that has been destroyed (<a href="c31-sec04.xhtml#bib2268">Haynes et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). Stem cell transplantation has been carried out in humans with certain types <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page996" title="996"></span>of immune dysfunction, such as severe combined immunodeficiency; clinical trials using stem cells are under way in patients with a variety of disorders having an autoimmune component, including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, and multiple sclerosis. Research with embryonic stem cells has enabled investigators to make substantial gains in developmental biology, gene therapy, therapeutic tissue engineering, and the treatment of a variety of diseases (<a href="c31-sec04.xhtml#bib2268">Haynes et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1265">Cancer and Immunotherapy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">It has long been understood that the immune system plays a role in fighting off malignancies. Recent advances in cancer treatment have sought to augment the body&#x2019;s natural antitumor activity and to shut down the pathways that allow malignancies to elude the immune system, which has led to the development of such treatments as MoAbs, cancer vaccines, immune adjuvants, immune checkpoint inhibitors, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy and cytokines. These immunotherapeutic treatments are designed to stimulate the patient&#x2019;s immune system to mount its own defense against the cancer and have revolutionized the treatment of many different cancer types. See <a href="c12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a> for a discussion on the use of immunotherapy in cancer (<a href="c31-sec04.xhtml#bib2279">Gon&#x00E7;alves &#x0026; Paiva, 2017</a>; <a href="c31-sec04.xhtml#bib2314">Ribas &#x0026; Wolchok, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>