<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1324">Urticaria and Angioedema</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong>Urticaria</strong> (hives) is a type I hypersensitive allergic reaction of the skin that is characterized by the sudden appearance of intensely pruritic pink or red discrete papules that progress to wheals of variable size. Urticarial lesions coalesce and evolve into large erythematous plaques (AAAAI, 2019b). This is a common condition with up to 20% of people having at least one episode of hives during their lifetime. Urticaria is most commonly instigated by infections, allergic reactions to food, insect stings, and medications (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2383">Asero, Tedeschi, Marzano, et al., 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Acute urticaria evolves over a time span of minutes to hours and disappears by 24 hours; lesions can be in different stages over this time. Urticaria is considered acute if it has been present for less than 6 weeks. However, if urticaria occurs frequently and reoccurs daily for longer than 6 weeks, the condition is called chronic urticaria. In urticaria, mast cells and basophils within the skin are activated and release histamine and inflammatory mediators that cause vasodilation (AAAAI, 2019b).</p>
<p class="indent">Common causes of urticaria include allergic reactions to medications or contact allergens, foods, insect stings and bites; reactions to medications that cause nonallergic mast cell activation (e.g., opioids); latex allergy; transfusions; and NSAIDs. Physical urticarial syndromes are forms of chronic urticaria that are triggered by specific physical and environmental factors, such as cold exposure, sudden changes in body temperature, pressure or vibration against the skin, exercise, exposure to sunlight, or other stimuli (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Asero, 2017</a>). Serum sickness, a type III hypersensitivity reaction, commonly due to medication, can also cause urticaria. Serum sickness classically causes rash, fever, and polyarthralgias or polyarthritis, which begin 1 to 2 weeks after the first exposure to the responsible agent and resolve within a few weeks of discontinuation (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Wener, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The diagnosis of urticaria can usually be made by health history and physical examination. Laboratory testing is usually not necessary.</p>
<p class="indent">Management of the condition includes eliminating the causative agent; avoiding the use of NSAIDs; and minimizing potential aggravators, including heat, stress, alcohol, and tight clothes. Treatment with second-generation H<sub>1</sub> antihistamine agents (e.g., cetirizine, fexofenadine, loratadine) is the mainstay of treatment. These agents are better tolerated as they have less sedating effects than first-generation H<sub>1</sub> antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, hydroxyzine). Doses of second-generation antihistamines may be increased as high as four times the standard dose (Khan, 2019a). Oral corticosteroids given in a decreasing dose schedule may be prescribed to relieve severe symptoms for a few days. About 50% of cases of chronic spontaneous urticaria will respond to treatment with antihistamines, as discussed above. For those patients who do not improve with antihistamines, 65% might respond to prescribed omalizumab. Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody that acts against IgE antibodies, is injected under the skin every 2 to 4 weeks by a primary provider. Therapeutic effects can be seen within 3 to 6 months (AAAAI, 2019b; Stokes &#x0026; Casale, 2018).</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;angioedema:&lt;/b&gt; condition characterized by urticaria and diffuse swelling of the deeper layers of the skin (&lt;em&gt;synonym&lt;/em&gt;: angioneurotic edema)">Angioedema</button></strong> is an allergic reaction that involves the infiltration of fluid in subcutaneous tissue and mucous membranes resulting in diffuse swelling. It is manifested by nonpruritic, brawny, widespread, nonpitting edema. Urticaria and angioedema often occur together (AAAAI, 2019b; Habif, 2016).</p>
<p class="indent">The regions most often involved in angioedema are the lips, eyelids, cheeks, hands, feet, genitalia, and tongue; the mucous membranes of the larynx, bronchi, and gastrointestinal tract may also be affected, particularly in the hereditary type (see discussion in the following section). On occasion, this reaction covers the entire back or large area of the body. Swellings may appear suddenly, in a few seconds or minutes, or slowly over 1 or 2 hours. It usually resolves within 24 hours. Angioedema is usually a benign and transient condition, although it can be life-threatening when severe angioedema of the larynx, upper airway, or tongue results in airway obstruction (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Zuraw, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Two types of angioedema can be distinguished: mast cell&#x2013;mediated, also called histaminergic angioedema, and bradykinin-mediated angioedema. Allergic reactions to foods, latex, certain drugs, or insect stings are common examples of mast cell&#x2013;mediated angioedema. Histamine is the main inflammatory mediator and signs and symptoms include <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1060" title="1060"></span>urticaria, flushing, generalized pruritus, bronchospasm, throat tightness, and/or hypotension. Patients may be experiencing anaphylaxis and should be treated immediately with epinephrine. Mast cell&#x2013;mediated angioedema usually begins within minutes of exposure to the allergen, builds over a few hours, and resolves in 24 to 48 hours (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Zuraw, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Alternatively, bradykinin-induced angioedema does not involve histamine and is not associated with urticaria, bronchospasm, or other symptoms of allergic reactions. Bradykinin is a potent vasodilator which also increases vasopermeability (Cicardi &#x0026; Zuraw, 2018a). The fluid infiltration of the tissues usually develops over 24 to 36 hours and resolves within 2 to 4 days. The relationship between the trigger and the onset of symptoms is often not apparent. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g., captopril) are common causes of bradykinin-induced angioedema; swelling may appear within a week of starting the medication or after years of use (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Zuraw, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Second-generation H<sub>1</sub> antihistamines and corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for mast cell&#x2013;mediated angioedema. If angioedema is part of an anaphylactic reaction, intramuscular epinephrine is an important part of treatment (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Guyer &#x0026; Banerji, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment of bradykinin-induced angioedema involves avoidance of drug, icatibant, C1 inhibitor concentrate, ecallantide, and possibly administration of fresh-frozen plasma. Antihistamines are ineffective (Cicardi &#x0026; Zuraw, 2018b). Icatibant is a synthetic bradykinin beta-2-receptor antagonist. C1 inhibitor concentrate and exallantide inhibit kallikrein which is a protease involved in bradykinin production. Fresh-frozen plasma contains angiotensin-converting enzyme, and the administration of plasma is thought to degrade high levels of bradykinin (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Guyer &#x0026; Banerji, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>