<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1316">Contact Dermatitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory reaction of the skin due to contact with an exogenous substance. There are two basic types of contact dermatitis: irritant contact dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis (see <a href="#tt33-4">Table 33-4</a>). Irritant contact dermatitis is an inflammatory response of the skin to direct chemical damage that releases mediators predominantly from epidermal cells. Allergic contact dermatitis is a delayed (type 4) hypersensitivity reaction to exogenous contact antigens that involves activation of T cells (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Litchman, Nair, &#x0026; Atwater, 2019</a>). Eighty percent of contact dermatitis is irritant type and 20% is allergic type (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Fornacier &#x0026; Noor, 2018</a>). Most cases are caused by excessive exposure to or additive effects of irritants (e.g., soaps, detergents, metals, organic solvents, cosmetics). Skin sensitivity may develop after brief or prolonged periods of exposure, and the clinical picture may appear hours or weeks after the sensitized skin has been exposed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1317">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms of acute contact dermatitis include itching, burning, erythema, skin lesions (vesicles and bullae), and oozing (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Goldner &#x0026; Fransway, 2018</a>). The reaction is limited to the site of contact. Chronic contact dermatitis symptoms can include scaling, lichenification, thickening of the skin, and pigmentary changes. Secondary invasion by bacteria may develop in skin that is abraded by rubbing or scratching. Usually, there are no systemic symptoms unless the eruption is widespread.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1318">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Determining allergens responsible requires a history, physical examination, and patch testing.</p>
<p class="indent">Assessment includes the date of onset and any identifiable relationship to work environment and skin care products. The location of the lesions, distribution of the dermatitis, absence of other etiologies, and the history of exposure aid in determining the condition (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Goldner &#x0026; Fransway, 2018</a>). Patch testing and environmental history of exposure to contact allergens are required to verify the diagnosis. Patch testing <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1057" title="1057"></span>is the standard test for identification of culprit allergens in persons with allergic contact dermatitis. The patch test most commonly used is the thin-layer rapid use epicutaneous (TRUE) test. An extended screening panel (North American screening series) has increased sensitivity. Researchers reported an extended screening panel identified an additional 10.8% of patients with positive tests that were negative to TRUE test allergens (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Sundquist, Lang, &#x0026; Pasha, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt33-4">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;33-4</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Types, Testing, and Treatment of Contact Dermatitis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<div class="vst-horizontal-scroll-container">
<div class="vst-horizontal-scroll-content">
<table class="table">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
<col style="width:20%;"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="thead">Type</td>
<td class="thead">Etiology</td>
<td class="thead">Clinical Presentation</td>
<td class="thead">Diagnostic Testing</td>
<td class="thead">Treatment</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="td_p">Allergic</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="td_p">Results from contact of skin and allergenic substance; has a sensitization period of 10&#x2013;14 days</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="td_p">Vasodilation and perivascular infiltrates on the dermis</p><p class="td_p">Intracellular edema</p><p class="td_p">Usually seen on dorsal aspects of hand</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="td_p">Patch testing (contraindicated in acute, widespread dermatitis)</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="td_p">Avoidance of offending material</p><p class="td_p">Aluminum acetate (Burow Solution, Domeboro Powder) or cool water compress</p><p class="td_p">Systemic corticosteroids (prednisone) for 7&#x2013;10 days</p><p class="td_p">Topical corticosteroids for mild cases</p><p class="td_p">Oral antihistamines to relieve pruritus</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Irritant</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Results from contact with a substance that chemically or physically damages the skin on a nonimmunologic basis; occurs after first exposure to irritant or repeated exposures to milder irritants over an extended time</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Dryness lasting days to months</p><p class="td_p">Vesiculation, fissures, cracks</p><p class="td_p">Hands and lower arms most common areas</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Clinical picture</p><p class="td_p">Appropriate negative patch tests</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Identification and removal of source of irritation</p><p class="td_p">Application of hydrophilic cream or petrolatum to soothe and protect</p><p class="td_p">Topical corticosteroids and compresses for weeping lesions</p><p class="td_p">Antibiotics for infection and oral antihistamines for pruritus</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="foot_r">Adapted from Comerford, K. C., &#x0026; Durkin, M. T. (2020). <i>Nursing 2020 drug handbook</i>. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>