<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1325">Hereditary Angioedema</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare, potentially life-threatening, autosomal dominant genetic disorder. It is a bradykinin-mediated type of angioedema that is due to a lack of C1 inhibitor activity, a specific protein that takes part in kinin generation. Kinins are inflammatory mediators; bradykinin is one of these. C1INH usually plays a role in limiting bradykinin production, so when C1INH is deficient or dysfunctional, bradykinin production is relatively unchecked (AAAAI, 2019c).</p>
<p class="indent">There are two different types of HAE; HAE type I is due to C1 inhibitor (C1INH) deficiency, and type II is caused by C1INH dysfunction (Cicardi &#x0026; Zuraw, 2018a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1326">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">HAE is commonly categorized as laryngeal, gastrointestinal, or cutaneous. Swelling of the skin is usually diffuse, nonpruritic, and not accompanied by urticaria. Attacks of swelling in patients with HAE generally involve the extremities, abdomen, genitourinary tract, face, oropharynx, or larynx and follow a stereotypical pattern in which the swelling worsens over 24 hours, peaks, and then slowly resolves over the following 48 hours. Gastrointestinal edema may cause abdominal pain severe enough to be incapacitating. Typically, attacks last 2 to 4 days and resolve without intervention; however, attacks can occasionally affect the subcutaneous and submucosal tissues in the region of the upper airway and can be associated with respiratory obstruction and asphyxiation (Cicardi &#x0026; Zuraw, 2018a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1327">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Attacks usually subside within 2 to 4 days, but during this time the patient should be observed carefully for signs of laryngeal obstruction, which may necessitate tracheostomy as a lifesaving measure. Epinephrine, antihistamines, and corticosteroids are commonly administered in an attempt to relieve HAE; however, these are often ineffective. A trial of high doses of second-generation H<sub>1</sub> antihistamines for 1 month may be effective in some patients. If this proves unsuccessful, C1INH concentrate, derived from human plasma, recombinant human C1INH (rhC1INH, conestat alfa), icatibant, a synthetic bradykinin beta-2-receptor antagonist and ecallantide, a recombinant plasma kallikrein inhibitor are agents that are available (Cicardi &#x0026; Zuraw, 2018b). Nurses need to be prepared to use different emergency approaches in the treatment of HAE and to have lifesaving equipment readily available.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>