<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1328">Cold Urticaria</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Cold urticaria is a type of physical urticaria. Physical urticarias are inducible urticarias that are stimulated by environmental triggers. Cold urticaria is the development of wheals (hives) or angioedema due to exposure to cold. Mast cells release histamine and inflammatory mediators are stimulated in response to skin contact with cold objects, cold fluids, or cold air. It is an IgE-mediated atopic immune reaction. Cold urticaria most commonly affects young adults as a self-limited disorder that occurs over a period of 5 to 6 years.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1329">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient feels a burning or pruritic sensation and the skin is erythematous due to activation of sensory nerves and vasodilation of arterioles. Most commonly it is a localized reaction in areas exposed to cold. However, extensive cold contact, such as swimming in cold water, may result in systemic reactions, ranging from generalized urticaria to anaphylaxis, with symptoms involving the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and/or cardiovascular systems. Oropharyngeal angioedema, which can cause suffocation and severe hypotension, has been observed in some persons with the disorder (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Maurer, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1330">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cold urticaria is diagnosed by cold stimulation testing. An ice cube within a thin plastic bag of cold water is applied to the volar aspect of the forearm for 1 to 5 minutes. A positive test results in development of urticaria at the site. The test is considered positive if the test site shows a palpable and clearly visible wheal-and-flare skin reaction upon rewarming. All patients with any form of cold urticaria should carry an autoinjectable epinephrine device for emergency use because hives can progress to anaphylaxis. Pretreatment with an antihistamine prior to predictable cold exposure is recommended, because clinical experience suggests that antihistamine <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1061" title="1061"></span>pretreatment can prevent skin reactions and systemic reactions (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Maurer, 2019</a>). Patients with cold urticaria refractory to antihistamines can be treated with immunomodulator agents, such as omalizumab, certain antibiotics, leukotriene receptor antagonists, or cold desensitization therapy (Khan, 2019b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1331">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Prevention involves avoidance of cold stimuli. Patient education is needed about what environmental conditions can stimulate a reaction. For instance, patients should be instructed to expose a small section of the body to the water of a swimming pool prior to submerging the body in water. A wet suit can be used during swimming. Patients should understand that cold foods and beverages can stimulate oropharyngeal angioedema or anaphylaxis and should be avoided. Patients anticipating surgery may develop a reaction to the cold air within operating rooms and are instructed to alert surgical personnel that they have cold uriticaria and should be kept warm during any procedures. Cold intravenous solutions can also provoke a reaction (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Singleton &#x0026; Halverstam, 2016</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>