<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1322">Drug Hypersensitivity</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Drug hypersensitivity is the leading cause of fatal anaphylaxis, comprising 43% of deaths from anaphylaxis. All routes of administration are potentially fatal, but drugs given parenterally incur the greatest risk. Cutaneous rashes are among the most common reactions to medications and occur in approximately 2% to 3% of hospitalized patients (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Habif, 2016</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1057</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1058" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1058">p. 1058</span></div>
<p class="indent">A drug hypersensitivity reaction is defined by the time of appearance, possible mode of action (mechanism of immune stimulation), and resulting pathophysiology. According to the World Allergy Organization, immunologic drug reactions can be divided into immediate reactions (i.e., onset within 1 hour of exposure) and delayed reactions (onset after 1 hour), based on the timing of the appearance of symptoms (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2448">Tanno, Torres, Castells, et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">IgE-mediated immediate type 1 hypersensitivity reactions to a drug occur within 1 hour of administration of the agent. Delayed hypersensitivity reactions occur after 1 hour; most occur after 6 hours or days of treatment. These reactions can also occur after the course of medication is finished. These reactions may be caused by several different mechanisms, but they are not IgE mediated. Types II, III, and IV immunologic reactions are all considered delayed reactions (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">A disorder known as drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) can occur after weeks of continuous treatment. Also known as &#x201C;drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome&#x201D; (DiHS), it is characterized by fever, rash, and multiorgan involvement, and may or may not be associated with eosinophilia and lymphocytosis. Hepatitis and myocarditis can be part of DRESS. These reactions can persist for weeks to months, even after the medication is stopped (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Mockenhaupt, 2019</a>). Anticonvulsant agents (e.g., lamotrigine, phenytoin, phenobarbital) and allopurinol are the most frequently reported causes of DRESS (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Mockenhaupt, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Anaphylaxis is the most severe presentation of an IgE-mediated drug reaction. Medications administered IV may cause symptoms in seconds to minutes, while the same drug administered orally may cause symptoms in 3 to 30 minutes if taken on an empty stomach, and in 10 to 60 minutes if taken with food. The agents that most commonly exhibit this type of reaction include the following (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Beta-lactam drugs (e.g., penicillins and cephalosporins)</span></li>
<li><span>Neuromuscular blocking agents (e.g., pancuronium)</span></li>
<li><span>Quinolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin)</span></li>
<li><span>Platinum-containing chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., carboplatin)</span></li>
<li><span>Foreign proteins such as monoclonal antibodies (e.g., rituximab)</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">Type II cytotoxic reactions involve antibody-mediated cell destruction. Type II reactions may arise when drugs bind to surfaces of certain cell types and act as antigens. Clinical manifestations include hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia, since these are the cell types that are most often affected. The drugs most commonly implicated in hemolytic anemia are cephalosporins, penicillins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and quinine and quinidine. Drugs implicated in thrombocytopenia include heparin, abciximab, quinine and quinidine, sulfonamides, vancomycin, gold compounds, beta-lactam antibiotics, carbamazepine, and NSAIDs. Severe neutropenia due to type II drug reactions presents days to weeks after beginning the medication. Clinical manifestations include symptoms of infection, such as fever, stomatitis, pharyngitis, pneumonia, or sepsis. Propylthiouracil, amodiaquine, and flecainide can cause these reactions (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Type III reactions are mediated by antigen&#x2013;antibody complexes that deposit on basement membranes and usually present as serum sickness, vasculitis, or drug fever. Signs and symptoms take 1 or more weeks to develop after drug exposure, since significant quantities of antibody are needed to generate symptoms related to antigen&#x2013;antibody complexes. These are uncommon reactions but are seen with antitoxins for rabies, botulism, and venoms, tetanus, hepatitis, and diphtheria vaccines (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Type IV reactions involve activated T cells, which take time to develop. Type IV reactions usually take at least 48 to 72 hours and sometimes days to weeks to develop following exposure to the drug. Type IV reactions can vary from a nonurticarial, maculopapular rash (drug fever) to Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (see <a href="c56.xhtml">Chapter 56</a>), or drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, or DRESS/DiHS. Type IV reactions can appear after weeks of drug treatment (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Medications are the most common agent responsible for approximately 90% of all drug rashes. Commonly prescribed medications (e.g., antibiotics, sulfonamides) are implicated in most cases (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Samel &#x0026; Chu, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Drug fever, which usually causes fever and rash, is associated with azathioprine, sulfasalazine, minocycline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, sirolimus, and tacrolimus (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">McDonald &#x0026; Sexton, 2019</a>). Contact dermatitis skin reactions can result from topical anesthetics such as benzocaine, topical antibiotics such as neomycin or bacitracin, and topic corticosteroids.</p>
<p class="indent">Symmetrical drug-related intertriginous and flexural exanthem (SDRIFE), formerly called baboon syndrome, is a distinctive drug eruption that typically develops within a few hours to days of drug exposure and presents with demarcated, V-shaped erythema in the gluteal/perianal or inguinal/perigenital areas, often with involvement of at least one other flexural area, such as the axillae, elbows, or knees. Aminopenicillins are a common trigger of SDRIFE (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Bircher, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare type of reaction characterized by superficial pustules, usually appearing within 24 hours after the administration of the culprit drug. Antimicrobial drugs (amoxicillin), antimalarials, and calcium channel blockers are the most frequently reported triggers of AGEP (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Cho &#x0026; Chu, 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis are severe reactions commonly triggered by medications. The disorder can evolve into extensive epidermal necrosis and become life-threatening. Mucous membranes are affected in over 90% of patients, usually at two or more distinct sites (ocular, oral, and genital). In some patients, an exanthematous eruption can be the heralding sign of Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Fever, often exceeding 39&#x00B0;C (102.2&#x00B0;F), and influenzalike symptoms precede development of mucocutaneous lesions and erythematous macules with purpuric centers that evolve into blisters and bullae. Photophobia, conjunctival itching or burning, and pain on swallowing may be due to mucosal involvement. Malaise, myalgia, and arthralgia are present in most patients. The following agents are most commonly implicated in Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">High, 2019</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Allopurinol</span></li>
<li><span>Aromatic antiepileptic drugs and lamotrigine</span></li>
<li><span>Antibacterial sulfonamides (including sulfasalazine)</span></li>
<li><span>Nevirapine</span></li>
<li><span>Oxicam NSAIDs</span></li></ul>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1058</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1059" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1059">p. 1059</span></div>
<p class="indent">Some conventional and targeted anticancer drugs have been associated with these syndromes including thalidomide, capecitabine, afatinib, vemurafenib, tamoxifen, and immune checkpoint inhibitors ipilimumab, pembrolizumab, and nivolumab. Radiation treatment in combination with antiepileptic drugs (e.g., phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine) can trigger Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">High, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Pharmacogenetic studies suggest that there is a genetic predisposition to drug allergy. In some populations, individuals with HLA-B*1502, HLA-B*5801, or HLA-B*5701 have an increased risk of developing Stevens&#x2013;Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis to aromatic anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine, allopurinol, cotrimoxazole, and abacavir, respectively (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Bircher, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1323">Pseudoallergic Drug Reactions</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Pseudoallergic drug reactions are adverse drug reactions with signs and symptoms that mimic immunologic drug allergies, but no immunologic mechanisms are occurring. They are referred to as nonimmunologic hypersensitivity reactions or anaphylactoid reactions. It is unclear how certain drugs elicit pseudoallergic reactions. However, degranulation of mast cells occurs. Some affected patients have underlying dermographism which indicates an &#x201C;instability&#x201D; of their mast cells. In dermographism, when pressure is applied to the skin, the skin reddens for a prolonged time in the same pattern as the pressure was applied. The following drugs may cause a pseudoallergic drug reaction (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Radiocontrast agents</span></li>
<li><span>Opioids (e.g., morphine and meperidine)</span></li>
<li><span>NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen) and aspirin</span></li>
<li><span>Vancomycin</span></li>
<li><span>Local anesthetic agents (e.g., lidocaine, benzocaine)</span></li>
<li><span>Chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., platinum-based drugs)</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The patient should be educated about avoidance and provided with a written list of the generic and brand names of the causative agents to avoid in the future (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Pichler, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>