<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1319">Atopic Dermatitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;atopic dermatitis:&lt;/b&gt; type I hypersensitivity involving inflammation of the skin evidenced by itching, redness, and a variety of skin lesions">Atopic dermatitis</button></strong> (commonly called eczema) is a chronic, inflammatory allergic skin disorder that is triggered by environmental factors in individuals who are genetically susceptible. This disorder affects 7% of adults in the United States (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Weston &#x0026; Howe, 2019</a>). More than half of patients are also affected by asthma, allergic rhinitis, and food allergies.</p>
<p class="indent">Atopic dermatitis is a type I immediate hypersensitivity disorder involving IgE antibodies that causes dry, pruritic, hypersensitive skin. It often begins with small red pruritic papules that stimulate intense itching, leaving erythematous, excoriated areas of skin. This often triggers an &#x201C;itch-scratch cycle&#x201D; where rubbing or scratching the skin causes further irritation, redness, and skin breakdown. Skin thickening from chronic scratching (lichenification) and fissuring may develop over time. In many patients, lesions in different stages may be present at the same time (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Weston &#x0026; Howe, 2019</a>). Atopic dermatitis in adults often occurs at the hands, wrists, elbows, knees, ankles, face, and neck.</p>
<p class="indent">Atopic dermatitis is due to a &#x201C;leaky&#x201D; skin barrier that allows water to leave the skin dried out and hypersensitive. Exposure of the hypersensitive skin to soaps, detergent, house dust mites, pollen, animal dander, and some bacteria break down the skin barrier (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Weston &#x0026; Howe, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Defective filaggrin (FLG) genes at chromosome 1q21.3 are common in persons with the disorder. Filaggrin is a protein produced by keratinocytes in the skin that is encoded by the FLG gene (L&#x2298;set, Brown, Saunes, et&#x00A0;al., 2019). Currently, there is ongoing investigation into the etiology of atopic dermatitis, including other genes involved in processing of filaggrin.</p>
<p class="indent">Nurses should be aware that atopic dermatitis is often linked to a process called the <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;atopic march:&lt;/b&gt; a progression of allergic disease beginning with atopic dermatitis continuing to IgE-mediated food allergy, asthma, and allergic rhinitis">atopic march</button></strong> that refers to the natural history of allergic diseases as they begin in infancy and through childhood. Atopic march begins with atopic dermatitis and progresses to IgE-mediated food allergy, asthma, and allergic rhinitis. It is the result of interactions between susceptibility genes, the environment, defective function of the skin barrier, and immunologic responses (AAAAI, 2019a; Hill &#x0026; Spergel, 2018).</p>
<p class="indent">The diagnosis of atopic dermatitis is based on the health history, morphology and distribution of skin lesions, and associated clinical signs. Laboratory testing, patch testing, and skin biopsy may be necessary if there is a need to rule out other skin conditions.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1320">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis involves avoidance of irritative agents, use of anti-inflammatory topical agents, and moisturization of the skin. Patients should avoid potential triggers of atopic dermatitis, which include excessive bathing without subsequent moisturization, low humidity environments, animal dander, dust mites, xerosis (dry skin), overheating of skin, and exposure to solvents and detergents. Individuals are commonly hypersensitive to fragrances, perfumes, and contact allergens such as nickel.</p>
<p class="indent">Topical corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment of atopic dermatitis. If mild OTC corticosteroids are not adequate, more potent corticosteroids such as fluocinoline 0.025%, triamcinolone, 0.1%, or betamethasone, 0.05% are prescribed. These agents should not be used on the face as they can cause skin atrophy. Topical calcineurin inhibitors, which are nonsteroidal immunomodulating agents (e.g., tacrolimus, pimecrolimus), are best for the facial area. Treatment of severe flare-ups of chronic disease can be treated with a short course of systemic corticosteroids (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Weston &#x0026; Howe, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Dupilumab is an interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 receptor-alpha antagonist that was approved by the FDA for the treatment of patients aged 12 years and older with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis not adequately controlled with topical prescription therapies (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Spergel &#x0026; Lio, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Colonization with <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> occurs more frequently in individuals with atopic dermatitis than in the general population, and <em>S. aureus</em> is a common cause of secondary infection in these patients. The presence of purulence or honey-colored crusts suggests <em>S. aureus</em> infection. Antibiotic treatment is needed to eradicate infection (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Spergel &#x0026; Lio, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1321">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients who experience atopic dermatitis and their families require assistance and support from the nurse to cope with the disorder. The symptoms are often disturbing to the patient and disruptive to the family. The appearance of the skin may affect the patient&#x2019;s self-esteem and their willingness to interact with others. Instructions and counseling about strategies to incorporate preventive measures and treatments into the lifestyle of the family may be helpful.</p>
<p class="indent">Skin hydration is a key component of treatment as atopic skin is low in moisture. Thick cream moisturizers and emollients that contain glycerol or urea should be used as these will keep the skin hydrated. A hydrating bath with mild soap followed by immediate emollient application is recommended, or a shower of short duration (<a href="c33-sec13.xhtml#bib2462">Spergel &#x0026; Lio, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Itching can be decreased by wearing cotton fabrics, washing clothes with a mild detergent, and humidifying dry heat in winter. Antihistamines such as diphenhydramine may be used as treatment, but since they are sedating, the patient can be advised that it is best to use them at bedtime.</p>
<p class="indent">The patient and family need to be aware of signs of secondary infection and of the need to seek treatment if infection occurs. The nurse also educates the patient and family about the side effects of medications used in treatment.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>