<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1386">Spondyloarthropathies</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The spondyloarthropathies are another category of systemic inflammatory disorders of the skeleton. The spondyloarthropathies include ankylosing spondylitis (AS), reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter&#x2019;s syndrome), and psoriatic arthritis. Spondyloarthritis is also associated with inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn&#x2019;s disease (regional enteritis) and ulcerative colitis (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">These rheumatic diseases share several clinical features. The inflammation tends to occur peripherally at the sites of attachment&#x2014;at tendons, joint capsules, and ligaments. Periosteal inflammation may be present. Many patients have arthritis of the sacroiliac joints. The onset tends to occur during young adulthood, with the disease affecting men more often than women. There is a strong tendency for these conditions to occur in families. Frequently, the HLA-B27 genetic marker is found. In addition, more than one of these conditions can be found simultaneously in the same person or another family member (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">As with other inflammatory conditions, patients with spondyloarthropathies have an increased risk for cardiovascular disease. These findings may be related to a state of chronic systemic inflammation and an increase in traditional cardiac risk factors, such as lack of exercise due to increased pain (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1387">Ankylosing Spondylitis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">AS is a chronic inflammatory disease of the spine. It is more prevalent in males than in females and is usually diagnosed in the second or third decade of life. The disease is also more severe in males, and significant systemic involvement is likely (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">AS affects the cartilaginous joints of the spine and surrounding tissues, making them rigid, decreasing mobility, and leading to kyphosis (a stooped position). This kyphosis can, in turn, lead to decreased stability and balance. Back pain is the characteristic feature. The back pain can be so severe that it may mask symptoms of a cervical fracture, which can lead to neurologic problems if left untreated. Occasionally, the large synovial joints, such as the hips, knees, or shoulders, may be involved (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">AS also exhibits systemic effects as the heart and lungs become constricted in the chest cavity (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>). Another potential complication of AS is the risk of osteoporosis, which appears to be related to the inflammatory process as well as bone turnover and low vitamin D levels. Other complications involve atrioventricular conduction defects, aortic insufficiency, and pulmonary fibrosis. As the disease progresses, ankylosis (i.e., fixation or immobility) of the entire spine may occur, leading to respiratory compromise and further complications.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1388">Reactive Arthritis (Reiter&#x2019;s Syndrome)</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The disease process involved in reactive arthritis is called <em>reactive</em> because the arthritis occurs after an infection, primarily gastrointestinal or genitourinary (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>). It mostly affects young adult males and is characterized primarily by urethritis, arthritis, and conjunctivitis. Dermatitis and ulcerations of the mouth and penis may also be present. Low back pain is common.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1389">Psoriatic Arthritis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory arthritis associated with the skin disease psoriasis. Approximately 7% of people with psoriasis develop psoriatic arthritis (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Norris, 2019</a>). Psoriasis is the most common autoimmune disease in the United States, affecting 2% to 3% of the population. Psoriatic arthritis onset occurs between 30 and 50 years of age and affects equal numbers of men and women (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Dewing, 2015</a>). See <a href="c56.xhtml">Chapter 56</a> for more information on psoriasis.</p>
<p class="indent">Psoriatic arthritis is characterized by synovitis, polyarthritis, and spondylitis. Inflammatory back pain is a common symptom, which is differentiated from other back pain by symptoms of back pain presenting at a young age, pain improving with activity, and pain occurring at night. Radiographic evidence of asymetrical sacroilitis or spondylitis may also assist with diagnosing psoriatic arthritis (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Dewing, 2015</a>). Other sites of pain commonly seen in these patients are the Achilles tendon, plantar fascia, or tibial tuberosity areas. Pain in these areas is common from the inflammation that occurs <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1089" title="1089"></span>at the entheses, where tendons and ligaments attach to the bone.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1390">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical management of spondyloarthropathies focuses on treating pain and maintaining mobility by suppressing inflammation. For the patient with AS, good body positioning and posture are essential so that if ankylosis does occur, the patient is in the most functional position. Maintaining range of motion with regular exercise and a muscle-strengthening program is especially important and has been linked with higher quality of life for patients.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">NSAIDs are the first-line therapy for treating all spondylarthropathies. All chronic conditions (cardiac, renal, and gastrointestinal) should be taken into consideration when prescribing long-term NSAIDs. Methotrexate, sulfasalazine, and leflunomide may also be used; these drugs may help with skin and peripheral joint disease but may not prevent spinal changes. Corticosteroid injections may be used for periodic flares; however, oral and long-term use of steroids is not recommended due to the possibility of psoriatic skin flare when discontinuing use.</p>
<p class="indent">Disease remission is now the target for psoriatic arthritis (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Mease &#x0026; Coates, 2018</a>). Anti-TNF medications that have been used effectively include etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, and certolizumabpegol. Additional agents include apremilast, which is a PDE4 inhibitor, and ustekinumab, an anti-IL12/anti-IL23 agent (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Mease &#x0026; Coates, 2018</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">With advanced AS and subsequent debilitating kyphosis, an osteotomy of the spine can be done. One study showed that an average correction of 45 degrees in the cervical spine was obtained and that quality of life also improved. Surgical management may also include total joint replacement (see <a href="c36.xhtml">Chapter 36</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1391">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Major nursing interventions in the spondyloarthropathies are related to symptom management and maintenance of optimal functioning. Affected patients are primarily young men. Their major concerns are often related to prognosis and job modification, especially among those who perform physical work. Patients may also express concerns about leisure and recreational activities. Focusing on physical activity and staying active and maintaining good posture will help to prevent chronic changes that may lead to deformities. It is important to address psychological changes, such as depression and emotional stress, that can occur with the diagnosis and chronic nature of the disease. If symptoms are present, the primary provider should assess for emotional stress and treat as appropriate.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>