<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1398">Fibromyalgia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Fibromyalgia is a chronic pain syndrome that involves chronic fatigue, generalized muscle aching, stiffness, sleep disturbances, and functional impairment. It is estimated to affect more than 5 million Americans, representing 2% to 5% of the general population, with women affected more than men. Between 25% and 65% of patients with fibromyalgia have other rheumatic conditions such as RA, SLE, and AS (CDC, 2017).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1399">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The amplified pain experienced by patients with fibromyalgia is thought to be neurogenic in origin. The central nervous system&#x2019;s ascending and descending pathways that regulate and moderate pain processing function abnormally, causing amplification of pain signals. Some describe this as if the &#x201C;volume control setting&#x201D; for pain were abnormally high. Therefore, stimulation that may not normally elicit pain, such as touch, may do so. In addition, there are a number of predisposing factors to pain, including anxiety, depression, physical trauma, emotional stress, sleep disorder, and viral infection (CDC, 2017; <a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2513">Melin, Svensson, &#x0026; Thulesius, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1400">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Since fibromyalgia is a diffuse syndrome, standard diagnostic testing is often not useful except to rule out other conditions that may be causing the pain. One study reported that two items, pain upon pinching the Achilles tendon using 4 kg of pressure for 4 seconds and an affirmative answer to the statement &#x201C;I have a persistent deep aching all over my body,&#x201D; were the most useful in recognizing fibromyalgia (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2484">Jones, Aebischer, St John, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Positive responses to these screening items need to be followed by a comprehensive examination for confirmation of a diagnosis (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2484">Jones et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1401">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment consists of attention to the specific symptoms reported by the patient. NSAIDs may be used to treat the diffuse muscle aching and stiffness. Tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline and nortriptyline as well as sleep hygiene measures are used to improve or restore normal sleep patterns (CDC, 2017). Muscle relaxants such as cyclobenzaprine may also be used to help with relaxation and pain. Cognitive behavioral therapy is also useful in improving sleep and attentional dysfunction. In addition, serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, such as duloxetine, venlafaxine, and milnacipran; selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, including fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline; as well as anticonvulsants such as gabapentin and pregabalin may be effective. Individualized programs of exercise are used to decrease muscle weakness and discomfort and to improve the general deconditioning that occurs in affected patients. There has been some promising research in complementary, alternative, and integrative health therapies, such as acupuncture (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2487">Kim, Kim, Lee, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1402">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Typically, patients with fibromyalgia have endured their symptoms for a long period of time. They may feel as if their symptoms have not been taken seriously. Nurses need to pay special attention to supporting these patients and providing encouragement as they begin their program of therapy. Patient support groups may be helpful (<a href="c34-sec06.xhtml#bib2492">Melin et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). Careful listening to patients&#x2019; descriptions of their concerns and symptoms is essential to help them make the changes that are necessary to improve their quality of life.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>