<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1067" title="1067"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 34</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Assessment and Management of Patients with Inflammatory Rheumatic Disorders</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Explain the pathophysiology of inflammatory rheumatic diseases and describe the assessment and diagnostic findings seen in patients with these disorders.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient with an inflammatory rheumatic disorder.</span></li>
<li><span>Devise an education plan for the patient with newly diagnosed inflammatory rheumatic disease.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify modifications in interventions to accommodate changes in patients&#x2019; functional ability that may occur with disease progression.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Assessment</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Cellular Regulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Comfort</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Immunity</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Infection</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Inflammation</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">arthritis:</span> inflammation of a joint</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">cytokines:</span> cell signaling proteins that are vital to regulation of hematopoiesis, apoptosis, and immune responses</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">exacerbation:</span> period when disease symptoms occur or increase</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">pannus:</span> proliferation of newly formed synovial tissue infiltrated with inflammatory cells</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">remission:</span> period when disease symptoms are reduced or absent</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">rheumatic diseases:</span> numerous disorders affecting skeletal muscles, bones, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, and joints</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">rheumatoid arthritis:</span> a systemic autoimmune disease with symmetric arthritic manifestations and multiple extra-articular features</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">subchondral bone:</span> bony plate that supports the articular cartilage</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">tophi:</span> accumulation of crystalline deposits in articular surfaces, bones, soft tissue, and cartilage</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;rheumatic diseases:&lt;/b&gt; numerous disorders affecting skeletal muscles, bones, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, and joints">rheumatic diseases</button></strong> encompass autoimmune, degenerative, inflammatory, and systemic conditions that affect the joints, muscles, and soft tissues of the body. Rheumatic diseases most commonly manifest the clinical features of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;arthritis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of a joint">arthritis</button></strong> (inflammation of a joint) and pain. There are more than 100 types of rheumatic diseases. The problems caused by rheumatic diseases include limitations in mobility and activities of daily living, pain, fatigue, altered self-image, and sleep disturbances, as well as systemic effects that can lead to organ failure and death. An understanding of inflammatory rheumatic diseases and their effects on a patient&#x2019;s function and well-being is essential to developing an appropriate plan of nursing care.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>