<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1504">Joint Dislocations</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dislocation:&lt;/b&gt; complete separation of joint surfaces">dislocation</button></strong> of a joint is a condition in which the articular surfaces of the distal and proximal bones that form the joint are no longer in anatomic alignment. A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;subluxation:&lt;/b&gt; partial separation of joint surfaces">subluxation</button></strong> is a partial or incomplete dislocation and does not cause as much deformity as a complete dislocation. In complete dislocation, the bones are literally &#x201C;out of joint.&#x201D; Acute traumatic dislocations are orthopedic emergencies because the associated joint structures, blood supply, and nerves are displaced and may be entrapped with extensive pressure on them. If a dislocation or subluxation is not reduced immediately, <strong>avascular necrosis (AVN)</strong> may develop. AVN of bone is caused by ischemia, which leads to necrosis or death of the bone cells.</p>
<p class="indent">Signs and symptoms of a traumatic dislocation include acute pain, change in or awkward positioning of the joint, and decreased ROM. Bilateral assessment will usually make apparent the abnormality in the affected joint. X-rays are usually taken to confirm the diagnosis and reveal any associated fracture (<a href="c37-sec11.xhtml#bib2816">DeBerardino, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1505">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">When a joint is dislocated, the main treatment priorities are to avoid neurovascular complications and reduce the joint as atraumatically as possible (<a href="c37-sec11.xhtml#bib2816">DeBerardino, 2018</a>). The affected joint needs to be immobilized at the scene and during transport to the hospital. Informed consent for the procedure is obtained and the dislocation is promptly reduced so that displaced parts are placed back in proper anatomic position to preserve joint function (see <a href="c37-sec03.xhtml#ct37-1">Chart 37-1</a>). Analgesia, muscle relaxants, and possibly anesthesia are used to facilitate closed reduction. The joint is immobilized by splints, casts, or traction and is maintained in a stable position. Neurovascular status is assessed at a minimum of every 15 minutes until stable. After reduction, if the joint is stable, gentle, progressive, active and passive movement is begun to preserve ROM and restore strength. The joint is supported between exercise sessions.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1506">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The focus of nursing care is on frequent assessment and evaluation of the injury, including complete neurovascular assessment with proper documentation and communication with the primary provider. The patient and family members are educated regarding proper exercises and activities as well as danger signs and symptoms to look for, such as increasing pain (even with analgesic agents), numbness or tingling, and increased edema in the extremity. These signs and symptoms may indicate acute compartment syndrome; if acute compartment syndrome is not identified and communicated to the primary provider, it may lead to disability or loss of the extremity (see later discussion).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>