<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1563">Sports-Related Musculoskeletal Injuries</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Sports-related injuries are common. <a href="c37-sec11.xhtml#tt37-1">Table 37-1</a> displays common musculoskeletal sports injuries, their mechanisms of injury, assessment findings, and acute care management.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1564">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients who have experienced sports-related musculoskeletal injuries are often highly motivated to return to their previous level of activity. Adherence to restriction of activities and gradual resumption of activities need to be reinforced. Injured athletes are at risk for reinjury and require follow-up and monitoring. With recurrence of symptoms, athletes need to diminish their level and intensity of activity to a comfortable level. The time required to recover from a sports-related injury can be as short as a few days or as long as 12 weeks, depending on the severity of the injury. The patient should be pain free with good ROM before returning to play (<a href="c37-sec11.xhtml#bib2816">Norris, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Sports-related musculoskeletal injuries can often be prevented by using proper equipment and by effectively training and conditioning the body. Specific training needs to be tailored to the person and the sport. Stretching, maintaining hydration, and proper nutrition aid in injury prevention (<a href="c37-sec11.xhtml#bib2816">Norris, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>