<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1592">Periapical Abscess</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;periapical abscess:&lt;/b&gt; abscessed tooth">periapical abscess</button></strong>, more commonly referred to as an abscessed tooth, involves a collection of pus in the apical dental periosteum (fibrous membrane supporting the tooth structure) and the tissue surrounding the apex of the tooth (where it is suspended in the jaw bone). The abscess may be acute or chronic. An acute periapical abscess arises from an infection, usually secondary to dental caries. The infection of the dental pulp extends through the apical foramen of the tooth to form an abscess around the apex.</p>
<p class="indent">A chronic periodontal abscess occurs from a slowly progressive infectious process. In contrast to the acute form, a fully formed abscess may occur without the patient&#x2019;s knowledge. The infection eventually leads to a &#x201C;blind dental abscess,&#x201D; which is actually a periapical granuloma. It may enlarge to as much as 1 cm in diameter. It is often discovered on x-ray images and is treated by extraction or root canal therapy, often with apicoectomy (excision of the apex of the tooth root).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1593">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The abscess produces a dull, gnawing, continuous pain, often with a surrounding cellulitis and swelling of the adjacent facial structures, temperature sensitivity, and mobility of the involved tooth. The gum opposite the apex of the tooth is usually swollen on the cheek side. Swelling and cellulitis of the facial structures may make it difficult for the patient to open the mouth. There may also be a systemic response, fever, and malaise.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1594">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In the early stages of an infection, a dentist or oral surgeon may perform a needle aspiration or drill an opening into the pulp chamber to relieve pressure and pain and to provide drainage. Drainage is provided by an incision through the gingiva down to the jawbone. Purulent material escapes under pressure. This procedure may be performed in a dentist&#x2019;s office, an outpatient surgery center, or a same-day surgery department. After the inflammatory reaction has subsided, the tooth may be extracted or root canal therapy performed. Antibiotics, in the presence of overt spreading infection, and analgesics may be prescribed (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2935">Robertson, Keys, Rautemaa-Richardon, et&#x00A0;al., 2015</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1595">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is assessed for bleeding after treatment and is instructed to use a warm saline or warm water mouth rinse to keep the area clean. The patient is also instructed to take antibiotic and analgesic agents as prescribed, to advance from a liquid diet to a soft diet as tolerated, and to keep follow-up appointments.</p>
<p class="SPH1" id="sec5">DISORDERS OF THE JAW</p>
<p class="nonindent">Abnormal conditions affecting the mandible (jaw) and the temporomandibular joint (which connects the mandible to the temporal bone at the side of the head in front of the ear) include congenital malformation, fracture, chronic dislocation, cancer, and syndromes characterized by pain and limited motion. Temporomandibular disorders and jaw surgery, a treatment common in many structural abnormalities or cancer of the jaw, are presented in this section.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>