<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1642">Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong>Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)</strong> is a fairly common disorder marked by backflow of gastric or duodenal contents into the esophagus that causes troublesome symptoms and/or mucosal injury to the esophagus. Excessive reflux may occur because of an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, pyloric stenosis, hiatal hernia, or a motility disorder. The incidence of GERD seems to increase with aging and is seen in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and obstructive airway disorder exacerbations (e.g., asthma, COPD, cystic fibrosis) (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Broers &#x0026; Tack, 2017</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Gabel, Galante, &#x0026; Freedman, 2019</a>), BE (see later discussion), peptic ulcer disease, and angina. GERD is associated with tobacco use, coffee drinking, alcohol consumption, and gastric infection with <em>Helicobacter pylori.</em></p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1643">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Pyrosis (heartburn, specifically more commonly described as a burning sensation in the esophagus that is noncardiac in nature) and regurgitation are the hallmark symptoms, but patients may also experience dyspepsia (indigestion), dysphagia or odynophagia, hypersalivation, and esophagitis. GERD can result in dental erosion, ulcerations in the pharynx and esophagus, laryngeal damage, esophageal strictures, adenocarcinoma, and pulmonary complications (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Kroch &#x0026; Madanick, 2017</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Patti, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1644">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient&#x2019;s history aids in obtaining an accurate diagnosis. Diagnostic testing may include ambulatory pH monitoring, which is the gold standard for the diagnosis of GERD, or a PPI trial. Ambulatory pH monitoring involves transnasal catheter placement or endoscopic wireless capsule placement for approximately 24 hours. Endoscopy or barium swallow is used to evaluate damage to the esophageal mucosa and rule out strictures and hernias (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Patti, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1645">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management begins with educating the patient to avoid situations that decrease lower esophageal sphincter pressure or cause esophageal irritation. Lifestyle modifications include tobacco cessation, limiting alcohol, weight loss, elevating the head of the bed, avoiding eating before bed, and altering the diet (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Kroch &#x0026; Madanick, 2017</a>). See <a href="c39-sec19.xhtml#tt39-4">Table 39-4</a> for a list of medications commonly used to manage GERD.</p>
<p class="indent">If medical management is unsuccessful, surgical intervention may be necessary. Surgical management involves an open or laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication, which involves wrapping of a portion of the gastric fundus around the sphincter area of the esophagus (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2903">Huerta et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Patti, 2016</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>