<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1604">Salivary Calculus (Sialolithiasis)</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Sialolithiasis, or salivary calculi (stones), occur in 80% of cases in the submandibular gland (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2891">Fabie, Kompelli, Naylor, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). Calculi within the salivary gland itself may cause no symptoms unless infection arises; however, a calculus that obstructs the gland&#x2019;s duct causes swelling and sudden, local, and often colicky pain, which is abruptly relieved by a gush of saliva. On physical assessment, the gland is swollen and quite tender, the stone itself may be palpable, and may be visualized by ultrasound, noncontrast computed tomography (CT), or sialendoscopy.</p>
<p class="indent">Salivary calculi are formed mainly from calcium phosphate. If located within the gland, the calculi are irregular and vary in diameter from 1 to 35 mm. Sialendoscopy is considered the standard in the treatment of sialothiasis, but gland-preserving incisional approaches alone may also be used for palpable stones 6 mm or larger (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2891">Fabie et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;lithotripsy:&lt;/b&gt; the use of shock waves to break up or disintegrate stones">Lithotripsy</button></strong>, a procedure that uses shock waves to disintegrate the stone, may be used instead of surgical extraction for parotid stones and smaller submandibular stones. Lithotripsy requires no anesthesia, sedation, or analgesia. Side effects can include local hemorrhage and swelling. Gland removal may be necessary if symptoms and calculi recur repeatedly.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>