<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1600">Jaw Disorders Requiring Surgical Management</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Correction of mandibular structural abnormalities may require surgery involving repositioning or reconstruction of the jaw. Simple fractures of the mandible without displacement, resulting from a blow to the chin, and planned surgical interventions, as in the correction of long or short jaw syndrome, may require wiring or surgery. Jaw reconstruction may be necessary in the aftermath of trauma from a severe injury or cancer, both of which can cause tissue and bone loss. Research supports screening for concussion (see <a href="c63.xhtml">Chapter 63</a>) with mandibular fractures associated with high-force impacts (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2943">Sobin, Kopp, Walsh, et&#x00A0;al., 2016</a>). Cervical spine injury must be ruled out since 2% to 10% of patients with facial fractures (up to 20% with panfacial injuries) also have a spinal injury (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Pickrell, Serebrakian, &#x0026; Maricevich, 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Mandibular fractures are usually closed fractures. In the acute trauma setting, surgery providers should assess the patient&#x2019;s perception of the bite (&#x201C;bite feels normal&#x201D;) for malocclusion, the fracture site for fragment mobility, dentition for loose or infected teeth, and sensation in the lower lip for nerve damage. When the dentition is sufficient and the fracture is isolated, maxillomandibular fixation (MMF; wiring the jaw shut) is a viable option. However, open reduction, internal fixation (ORIF) with plate fixation (insertion of one or more metal plates and screws or arch bars into the bone to approximate and stabilize the bone) is the surgery of choice (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2931">Pickrell et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Current research revolves around the use of various types and number of reconstruction plates and fixation devices, quality of life after specific instrumentation, approach used (ORIF or endoscopic-assisted), and device choice (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2952">van den Bergh, de Mol van Otterloo, van der Ploeg, et&#x00A0;al., 2015</a>). Bone grafting may be performed to replace structural defects using bones from the patient&#x2019;s own ilium, ribs, or cranial sites.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1601">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">If used, MMF generally requires a short period (7 to 10 days) of a liquid diet and oral rinses followed by rehabilitation and a soft diet. After ORIF, patients are typically on a liquid or soft diet for 4 to 6 weeks to allow for healing. The most common complications are infection that may progress to osteomyelitis (infection of the bone), alignment issues or hardware failure (requiring surgical repair or MMF), and wound dehiscence (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2931">Pickrell et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Dietary counseling is provided to ensure adequate protein intake with supplementation as needed. Oral care, including the use of medicated rinses, needs to be reinforced. To decrease the risk of complications, patients are advised to take prescribed medications and to abstain from smoking, use of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), including e-cigarettes, e-pens, e-pipes, e-hookah and e-cigars and use of alcohol and other substances. Regular follow-up with the surgeon is required to ensure healing is progressing.</p>
<p class="SPH1" id="sec6">DISORDERS OF THE SALIVARY GLANDS</p>
<p class="nonindent">The salivary glands consist of the parotid glands, one on each side of the face below the ear; the submandibular glands, located below the jawbone; the sublingual glands, in the floor of the mouth under the tongue; and the minor salivary glands in the lips, buccal mucosa, and the lining of the mouth and throat. About 1500 mL of saliva is produced daily and swallowed. The major functions of the salivary glands include lubrication, protection against harmful bacteria, and digestion.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>