<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1628">Hiatal Hernia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In the condition known as hiatal <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hernia:&lt;/b&gt; protrusion of an organ or part of an organ through the wall of the cavity that normally contains it">hernia</button></strong>, the opening in the diaphragm through which the esophagus passes becomes enlarged, and part of the upper stomach moves up into the lower portion of the thorax. Hiatal hernia occurs more often in women than in men. There are two main types of hiatal hernias: sliding and paraesophageal. Sliding, or type I, hiatal hernia occurs when the upper stomach and the gastroesophageal junction are displaced upward and slide in and out of the thorax (see <a href="c39-sec11.xhtml#ff39-10">Fig. 39-10</a>A). Between 90% and 95% of patients with esophageal hiatal hernia have a sliding hernia. A paraesophageal hernia occurs when all or part of the stomach pushes through the diaphragm beside the esophagus (see <a href="c39-sec11.xhtml#ff39-10">Fig. 39-10</a>B). Paraesophageal hernias are further classified as types II, III, or IV, depending on the extent of herniation. Type IV has the greatest herniation, with other intra-abdominal viscera such as the colon, omentum, or small bowel present in the hernia sac that is displaced through the hiatus along with the stomach (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2903">Huerta, Plymale, Barrett, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1629">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient with a sliding hernia may have pyrosis, regurgitation, and dysphagia, but many patients are asymptomatic. The patient may present with vague symptoms of intermittent epigastric pain or fullness after eating. Large hiatal hernias may lead to intolerance to food, nausea, and vomiting. Sliding hiatal hernias are commonly associated with GERD. Hemorrhage, obstruction, volvulus (bowel obstruction caused by a twist in the intestines and supporting mesentery), and strangulation can occur with any type of hernia but are more common with paraesophageal hernia (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2903">Huerta et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1630">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnosis is typically confirmed by x-ray studies; barium swallow; esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which is the passage of a fiberoptic tube through the mouth and throat into the digestive tract for visualization of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine; esophageal manometry; or chest CT scan (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2905">Kohn, Price, Demeester, et&#x00A0;al., 2013</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1631">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management for a hiatal hernia includes frequent, small feedings that can pass easily through the esophagus. The patient is advised not to recline for 1 hour after eating, to prevent reflux or movement of the hernia, and to elevate the head of the bed on 4- to 8-inch (10- to 20-cm) blocks to prevent the hernia from sliding upward. Surgical hernia repair is indicated in patients who are symptomatic, although the primary reason for the surgery is typically to relieve GERD symptoms and not repair the hernia. Current guidelines recommend a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1255" title="1255"></span>laparoscopic approach (Toupet or Nissen fundoplication procedures) (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2903">Huerta et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>), with an open transabdominal or transthoracic approach reserved for patients with complications such as bleeding, dense adhesions, or injury to the spleen.</p>
<p class="indent">Up to 50% of patients may experience early postoperative dysphagia; therefore, the nurse advances the diet slowly from liquids to solids, while managing nausea and vomiting, tracking nutritional intake, and monitoring weight. The nurse also monitors for postoperative belching, vomiting, gagging, abdominal distention, and epigastric chest pain, which may indicate the need for surgical revision; these should be reported immediately to the primary provider. Surgical repair is often reserved for patients with more extreme cases that involve gastric outlet obstruction or suspected gastric strangulation, which may result in ischemia, necrosis, or perforation of the stomach (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2905">Kohn et&#x00A0;al., 2013</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>