<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1641">Chemical Burns</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Chemical burns of the esophagus occur most often when a patient, either intentionally (67%; typically adults) or unintentionally (33%; typically children), swallows a strong acid or base, with alkaline agents being the most common (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Byard, 2015</a>). The patient is often emotionally distraught as well as in acute physical pain. Chemical burns of the esophagus may also be caused by undissolved medications in the esophagus, or they may occur after swallowing of a battery, which may release a caustic alkaline. The National Capital Poison Center (2018) provides an algorithm for button battery ingestion and triage (see Resources section). An acute chemical burn of the esophagus may be accompanied by severe burns of the lips, mouth, and pharynx, with pain on swallowing. Breathing difficulties due to either edema of the throat or a collection of mucus in the pharynx may occur. The patient needs to be closely monitored for tracheoesophageal fistula, perforation of large vessels, mediastinitis, vocal cord paralysis, tracheal stenosis or tracheomalacia, aspiration pneumonia, empyema, lung abscess, pneumothorax, spondylodiscitis, and strictures (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2923">National Capital Poison Center, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient, who may be profoundly toxic, febrile, and in shock, is treated immediately for shock, pain, and respiratory distress. Esophagoscopy and barium swallow are performed as soon as possible to determine the extent and severity of damage. Vomiting and gastric lavage are avoided to prevent further exposure of the esophagus to the caustic agent. Emergent esophagectomy (a total resection of the esophagus) or gastrectomy may be required (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Byard, 2015</a>). The patient remains NPO and IV fluids are given. The use of corticosteroids to reduce inflammation and minimize subsequent scarring and stricture formation is of questionable value. Antibiotics are prescribed if there is documented infection.</p>
<p class="indent">After the acute phase has subsided, the patient may need nutritional support via enteral or parenteral feedings. The patient may require further treatment to prevent or manage <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1257" title="1257"></span>strictures of the esophagus. Dilation may be sufficient, but may need to be repeated periodically (see previous discussion). For strictures that do not respond to dilation, surgical management may be necessary. Reconstruction may be accomplished by esophagectomy and colon interposition to replace the portion of esophagus removed. This surgery is quite complex and should be considered only when other options have failed.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>