<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1646">Barrett Esophagus</h4>
<p class="nonindent">BE is a condition in which the lining of the esophageal mucosa is altered. It occurs predominantly in White men aged 50 or older, and occurs in association with family history of BE or esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC), GERD, smoking, and obesity. The rate of BE was found to increase by 1.2% for each additional risk factor, indicating the additive effect of risk factors (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2932">Qumseya, Bukannan, Gendy, et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). BE is the only known precursor to EAC, one of the fastest rising cancers in Western populations (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2932">Qumseya et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>). The 5-year survival rate for EAC does not exceed 20% (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Iyer &#x0026; Kaul, 2019</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2932">Qumseya et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1647">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient complains of symptoms of GERD, notably frequent heartburn. The patient may also complain of symptoms related to peptic ulcers or esophageal stricture, or both.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1648">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">An EGD provides screening in patients with multiple risk factors. This usually reveals an esophageal lining that is pink rather than pale white. Biopsies are performed, and BE is diagnosed when the squamous mucosa of the esophagus is replaced by columnar epithelium (columnar metaplasia) at least 1 cm above the gastric folds, and that area resembles that of the stomach or intestines (intestinal metaplasia) as evidenced by the presence of goblet cells (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Iyer &#x0026; Kaul, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1649">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Monitoring varies depending on the extent of cell changes. When BE is caught and treated early, endoscopic ablation techniques have been shown to eliminate BE in up to 80% of patients, thereby preventing progression to <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dysplasia:&lt;/b&gt; bizarre cell growth resulting in cells that differ in size, shape, or arrangement from other cells of the same tissue type">dysplasia</button></strong>, the bizarre cell growth resulting in cells that differ in size, shape, or arrangement from other cells of the same tissue type. Such dysplasia is indicative of early EAC. Follow-up biopsies are recommended no sooner than 3 to 5 years after a biopsy shows no evidence of dysplasia (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Iyer &#x0026; Kaul, 2019</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2939">Sharma, Katzka, Gupta, et&#x00A0;al., 2015</a>). Treatment is individualized for each patient. Recommendations include surveillance with biopsies, the use of PPIs (see <a href="c39-sec19.xhtml#tt39-4">Table 39-4</a>) to control reflux symptoms, followed by endoscopic resection and/or radiofrequency ablation (high-frequency heat/cold energy that kills surrounding cells and tissues) for progression of dysplasia (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Iyer &#x0026; Kaul, 2019</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2939">Sharma et&#x00A0;al., 2015</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>