<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1596">Temporomandibular Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Temporomandibular disorders are categorized as follows (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2923">National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research [NIDCR], 2018</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Myofascial pain&#x2014;a discomfort in the muscles controlling jaw function and in neck and shoulder muscles</span></li>
<li><span>Internal derangement of the joint&#x2014;a dislocated jaw, a displaced disc, or an injured condyle</span></li>
<li><span>Degenerative joint disease&#x2014;rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis in the jaw joint</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">Diagnosis and treatment of temporomandibular disorders remain somewhat ambiguous, but the condition is thought to affect about 10 million people in the United States (NIDCR, 2018). Misalignment of the joints in the jaw and other problems associated with the ligaments and muscles of mastication are thought to result in tissue damage and muscle tenderness. Suggested causes include arthritis of the jaw, head injury, trauma or injury to the jaw or joint, stress, and malocclusion, although research does not support malocclusion (misalignment of bite) or associated orthodonture as a cause (NIDCR, 2018).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1597">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients have jaw pain ranging from a dull ache to throbbing, debilitating pain that can radiate to the ears, teeth, neck muscles, and facial sinuses. They often have restricted jaw motion and locking of the jaw. There also may be a sudden change in the way the upper and lower teeth fit together. The patient may hear clicking, popping, and grating sounds when the mouth is opened, and chewing and swallowing may be difficult. Symptoms such as headaches, earaches, dizziness, and hearing problems may sometimes be related to temporomandibular disorders (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Gauer &#x0026; Semidey, 2015</a>; NIDCR, 2018).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1598">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnosis is based on the patient&#x2019;s report of pain, limitations in range of motion, <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dysphagia:&lt;/b&gt; difficulty swallowing">dysphagia</button></strong> (difficulty swallowing), difficulty chewing, difficulty with speech, or hearing difficulties. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and other imaging studies are generally only used for severe or chronic symptoms.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1599">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Signs and symptoms improve over time for the majority of patients with temporomandibular joint disorders, with or without treatment. Conservative treatment is recommended <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1234" title="1234"></span>(NIDCR, 2018). Most patients improve with a combination of simple noninvasive therapies that may include: (1) patient education on self-care&#x2014;eating soft foods, icing the jaw; (2) cognitive behavior modifications&#x2014;stress reduction, sleep hygiene, avoidance of extreme mandibular movement, and elimination of habits such as chewing ice; (3) physical therapy&#x2014;stretching and relaxing; (4) acupuncture&#x2014;highly effective with six to eight 15- to 30-minute sessions; (5) psychosocial interventions; (6) analgesics&#x2014;trial of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and muscle relaxants initially; and (7) oral appliance therapy&#x2014;splints (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Gauer &#x0026; Semidey, 2015</a>; NIDCR, 2018).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>