<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1636">Perforation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Esophageal perforation is a surgical emergency. It may result from iatrogenic causes, such as endoscopy or intraoperative injury, or from spontaneous perforation associated with forceful vomiting or severe straining (Boerhaave syndrome), foreign-body ingestion, trauma, and malignancy. Immediate diagnosis and treatment are essential to minimize mortality. A delay of more than 24 hours is associated with higher mortality (20%) when compared to rapid recognition and treatment (7.4%). Perforation can occur at the cervical, thoracic, or abdominal portion of the esophagus (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Olivero, 2019</a>; <a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Raymond, 2020</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1255</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1256" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1256">p. 1256</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1637">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient has excruciating retrosternal pain followed by dysphagia. Infection, fever, leukocytosis, and severe hypotension may be noted. In addition, mediastinal sepsis can occur with Boerhaave syndrome, which may be accompanied by pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema (see <a href="c19.xhtml">Chapter 19</a> for discussion of pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1638">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">X-ray studies, fluoroscopy by either a barium swallow or esophagram (a noninvasive test), or a chest CT scan may be used to identify the site and scope of the injury.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1639">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Esophageal perforation requires immediate treatment. Treatment includes having the patient remain NPO (<em>nil per os</em>; nothing by mouth), beginning IV fluid therapy, administering broad-spectrum antibiotics (ampicillin-sulbactam, piperacillin-tazobactam, or a carbapenem [e.g., imipenem]), considering the need for antifungal therapy (if the patient is immunosuppressed, has HIV infection, or shows no improvement with antibiotics), supportive monitoring and care (intensive care unit level-of-care often required), and evaluating and preparing the patient for surgery (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Raymond, 2020</a>). Surgical repair of the perforation site is performed in most cases, even if the diagnosis is made after 24 hours. If surgical repair of the perforation is not possible due to the clinical status of the patient, then drainage, diversion, stent placement, or an esophagostomy (removal of the esophagus) may be performed (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Raymond, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Postoperative nutritional status is a major concern. The patient remains NPO for approximately 7 days, so enteral (e.g., jejunal feeding) or parenteral nutrition is started on postoperative day 2 or 3 (see <a href="c41.xhtml">Chapter 41</a> for further discussion of parenteral nutrition). The nurse uses water to moisten the patient&#x2019;s mouth for comfort measures only. A repeat esophagram is obtained on postoperative day 7 to verify there is no leak or ileus before the NG tube is removed and oral intake is permitted. It is common for broad-spectrum antibiotics to continue for 7 to 10 days postoperatively (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Raymond, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>