<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1602">Parotitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;parotitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of the parotid gland">Parotitis</button></strong> (inflammation of the parotid gland) is the most common inflammatory condition of the salivary glands. Inflammation of the parotid may be due to mumps (epidemic parotitis), a communicable disease caused by viral infection and most commonly affecting unvaccinated children (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2963">Grennan, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">People who are older, acutely ill, or debilitated with decreased salivary flow from general dehydration or medications are at high risk for bacterial parotitis. The infecting organism, typically <em>Staphylococcus aureus,</em> travels from the mouth through the salivary duct. The onset of parotitis is sudden and associated with fever, chills, and other systemic signs of infection. The gland swells and becomes tense and tender. The patient feels pain in the ear, and swollen glands interfere with swallowing. The swelling increases rapidly, and the overlying skin soon becomes red and shiny.</p>
<p class="indent">Medical management includes maintaining adequate nutritional and fluid intake, good oral hygiene, applying cold packs, and discontinuing medications (e.g., tranquilizers, diuretic agents) that can diminish salivation. Antibiotic therapy is necessary for bacterial parotitis, and analgesics may be prescribed to control pain. If antibiotic therapy is not effective, the gland may need to be drained by a surgical procedure known as parotidectomy. This procedure may be necessary to treat chronic parotitis. The patient is advised to have any necessary dental work performed prior to surgery.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>