<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1620">Achalasia</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;achalasia:&lt;/b&gt; absent or ineffective peristalsis (wavelike contraction) of the distal esophagus accompanied by failure of the esophageal sphincter to relax in response to swallowing">Achalasia</button></strong> is absent or ineffective peristalsis of the distal esophagus accompanied by failure of the esophageal sphincter to relax in response to swallowing. Narrowing of the esophagus just above the stomach results in a gradually increasing dilation of the esophagus in the upper chest. Achalasia is rare, may progress slowly, and occurs most often in people between ages 20 and 40 and ages 60 and 70 years (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1621">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The main symptom is dysphagia, with the hallmark being difficulty with solid food. The patient has a sensation of food sticking in the lower portion of the esophagus. As the condition progresses, food is commonly regurgitated either spontaneously or intentionally by the patient to relieve the discomfort produced by prolonged distention of the esophagus by food that will not pass into the stomach. The patient may also report noncardiac chest or epigastric pain and <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;pyrosis:&lt;/b&gt; a burning sensation in the stomach and esophagus that moves up to the mouth; commonly called heartburn">pyrosis</button></strong> (heartburn) that may or may not be associated with eating. These symptoms mirror those of GERD, and patients are often misdiagnosed and treated for GERD (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1622">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">X-ray studies show esophageal dilation above the narrowing at the lower gastroesophageal sphincter, which is called a <em>birds beak</em> deformity. Barium swallow, CT scan of the chest, and endoscopy may be used for diagnosis; however, high-resolution manometry, a process in which peristalsis, contraction amplitudes, and esophageal pressure is measured by a radiologist or gastroenterologist, confirms the diagnosis (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1623">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is instructed to eat slowly and to drink fluids with meals. Injection of botulinum toxin into quadrants of the esophagus via endoscopy has been helpful because it inhibits the contraction of smooth muscle. However, because the benefits of these injections fade over time and there is a risk of submucosal fibrosis, botulinum toxin is only used in patients who cannot receive other definitive treatments (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Achalasia may be treated conservatively by pneumatic dilation to stretch the narrowed area of the esophagus (see <a href="c39-sec11.xhtml#ff39-9">Fig. 39-9</a>). Pneumatic dilation has a high success rate; however, typically two dilations are required and the long-term results are variable (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>). Although perforation is a potential complication, its incidence is low (see later discussion). The procedure can be painful; therefore, moderate sedation in the form of an analgesic or tranquilizer, or both, is given for the treatment.</p>
<p class="indent">Achalasia may be treated surgically by esophagomyotomy, called a Heller myotomy, which involves cutting the esophageal muscle fibers. A complete lower esophageal sphincter myotomy is usually performed laparoscopically, with or without a <em>fundoplication</em> (antireflux procedure that minimizes the incidence of GERD). A newer technique, an endoscopic myotomy (per-oral endoscopic myotomy [POEM]) provides an alternative procedure that has been adopted by many high-volume achalasia centers (<a href="c39-sec20.xhtml#bib2944">Swanstr&#x00F6;m, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>