<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1770">Anal Fistula</h4>
<p class="nonindent">An anal fistula is a tiny, tubular, fibrous tract that extends into the anal canal from an opening located beside the anus in the perianal skin (see <a href="c41-sec15.xhtml#ff41-12">Fig. 41-12A</a>). Fistulas usually result from an abscess. They may also develop from trauma, fissures, or Crohn&#x2019;s disease. Purulent drainage or stool may leak constantly from the cutaneous opening. Other symptoms may be the passage of flatus or feces from the vagina or bladder, depending on the location of the fistula tract. Untreated fistulas may cause systemic infection with related symptoms (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Hebra, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Surgery is recommended because few fistulas heal spontaneously. A fistulectomy (i.e., excision of the fistulous tract) is the recommended surgical procedure. The lower bowel is evacuated thoroughly with several prescribed enemas. The fistula is dissected or laid open by an incision from its rectal opening to its outlet. The wound is packed with gauze. Postoperative medications include analgesics and antibiotics. Fistulas recur in up to half of patients (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Hebra, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>