<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1768">Proctitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Proctitis refers to inflammation of the mucosa of the rectum, which may be secondary to infection, IBD, celiac disease, rectal instrumentation, antibiotic treatment, or radiation. Infectious diseases are the most frequent cause of proctitis; these etiologies may be either from enteric organism (e.g., <em>Shigella, Salmonella</em>) or from sexually transmitted infections (STIs; also called <em>sexually transmitted diseases,</em> or STDs).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1333</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1334" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1334">p. 1334</span></div>
<p class="indent">Proctitis secondary to an STI may occur in any gender but is more prevalent among gay men who practice anorectal intercourse. It is commonly associated with recent anal-receptive intercourse with an infected partner. Symptoms include mucopurulent discharge or bleeding, rectal pain, and diarrhea. The pathogens most frequently involved are <em>Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis,</em> syphilis, herpes simplex virus, and <em>Clostridium difficile.</em> These infections may progress into proctocolitis and enteritis. Proctocolitis involves the rectum and lowest portion of the descending colon. Symptoms are similar to proctitis but may also include watery or bloody diarrhea, cramps, pain, and bloating. Enteritis involves more of the descending colon, and symptoms include watery, bloody diarrhea; abdominal pain; and weight loss. The most common pathogens causing enteritis are <em>E. histolytica, Giardia lamblia, and Shigella,</em> and <em>Campylobacter</em> species (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Irizarry, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Sigmoidoscopy is performed to identify portions of the anorectum involved. Samples are taken with rectal swabs, and cultures are obtained to identify the pathogens involved. Antibiotics (e.g., ceftriaxone, doxycycline) are the treatment of choice for gonorrheal proctitis. Acyclovir is given to patients with viral infections. Antiamebic therapy (i.e., metronidazole) is appropriate for infections with <em>E. histolytica</em> and <em>G. lamblia.</em> Metronidazole or oral vancomycin is recommended for patients with proctitis due to <em>C. difficile</em> infection (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Irizarry, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>