<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1772">Hemorrhoids</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hemorrhoids are dilated portions of veins in the anal canal. In the United States, approximately 10 million people have hemorrhoids; of these, nearly one third seek medical treatment for hemorrhoids annually (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Perry, 2019</a>). Shearing of the mucosa during defecation results in the sliding of the structures in the wall of the anal canal, including the hemorrhoidal and vascular tissues. Increased pressure in the hemorrhoidal tissue due to pregnancy may initiate hemorrhoids or aggravate existing ones. Hemorrhoids are classified into two types: those above the internal sphincter are called <em>internal hemorrhoids,</em> and those appearing outside the external sphincter are called <em>external hemorrhoids</em> (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Perry, 2019</a>) (see <a href="c41-sec15.xhtml#ff41-12">Fig. 41-12C</a>). Internal hemorrhoids are classified by their degree of prolapse (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Soweld, 2018</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>First degree&#x2014;do not prolapse and protrude into anal canal</span></li>
<li><span>Second degree&#x2014;prolapse outside the anal canal during defecation but reduce spontaneously</span></li>
<li><span>Third degree&#x2014;prolapsed to the extent that they require manual reduction</span></li>
<li><span>Fourth degree&#x2014;prolapsed to the extent that they may not be reduced and are at risk for strangulation and thrombosis</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">Hemorrhoids cause itching and pain and are the most common cause of bright red bleeding with defecation. External hemorrhoids are associated with severe pain from the inflammation and edema caused by thrombosis (i.e., clotting of blood within the hemorrhoid). This may lead to ischemia of the area and eventual necrosis. Internal hemorrhoids are not usually painful until they bleed or prolapse when they become enlarged.</p>
<p class="indent">Hemorrhoid symptoms and discomfort can be relieved by good personal hygiene and by avoiding excessive straining during defecation. A high-residue diet that contains fruit and bran along with an increased fluid intake may be all the treatment that is necessary to promote the passage of soft, bulky stools to prevent straining. If this treatment is not successful, the addition of hydrophilic bulk-forming agents such as psyllium may help. Warm compresses, sitz baths, analgesic ointments and suppositories, and astringents (e.g., witch hazel) reduce engorgement (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Perry, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">There are several types of nonsurgical treatments for hemorrhoids. Infrared photocoagulation, bipolar diathermy, and laser therapy are used to affix the mucosa to the underlying muscle. Injection of sclerosing agents is also effective for small, bleeding hemorrhoids. Sclerotherapy involves injecting a sclerosing agent (5% phenol in saline) into the base of the hemorrhoid to cause blood vessel thrombosis. These procedures help prevent prolapse (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Perry, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">A conservative surgical treatment of internal hemorrhoids is the rubber band ligation procedure. The hemorrhoid is visualized through the anoscope, and its proximal portion above the mucocutaneous lines is grasped with an instrument. A small rubber band is then slipped over the hemorrhoid. Tissue distal to the rubber band becomes necrotic after several days and sloughs off. Fibrosis occurs; the result is that the lower anal mucosa is drawn up and adheres to the underlying muscle. Although this treatment has been satisfactory for some patients, it has proven painful for others and may cause secondary hemorrhage. It has also been known to cause perianal infection (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Soweld, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Stapled hemorrhoidopexy uses surgical staples to treat prolapsing hemorrhoids and is associated with less postoperative pain and fewer complications. If it is not successful, hemorrhoidectomy, or surgical excision, may be performed to remove all of the redundant tissue involved in the process. During surgery, the rectal sphincter is usually dilated digitally, and the hemorrhoids are removed with a clamp and cautery or are ligated and then excised. After the surgical procedures are completed, a small tube may be inserted through the sphincter to permit the escape of flatus and blood; pieces of absorbable gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) or oxidized cellulose (Oxycel) gauze may be placed over the anal wounds (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Perry, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>