<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1767">Polyps of the Colon and Rectum</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A polyp is a mass of tissue that protrudes into the lumen of the bowel. Polyps can occur anywhere in the intestinal tract and rectum. They can be classified as neoplastic (i.e., typically adenocarcinomas) or non-neoplastic (i.e., mucosal and hyperplastic). Non-neoplastic polyps, which are benign epithelial growths, are common in the Western world. They occur more commonly in the large intestine than in the small intestine. Because polyps might develop into malignant neoplasms, they should be removed when they are identified, typically during screening colonoscopy (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Enders, 2020</a>). Adenomatous polyps are more common in men. The proportion of these polyps arising in the proximal part of the colon increases with age. The prevalence among adults over 60 years of age is estimated to be 10% (<a href="c41-sec17.xhtml#bib3143">Enders, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Clinical manifestations depend on the size of the polyp and the amount of pressure it exerts on intestinal tissue. Most commonly, there are no symptoms. When there are clinical manifestations, the most common is rectal bleeding. Lower abdominal pain may also occur. If the polyp is large enough, symptoms of obstruction occur. The diagnosis is based on history and digital rectal examination, double-contrast barium enema studies, sigmoidoscopy, or colonoscopy (NIDDK, 2017a).</p>
<p class="indent">After a polyp is identified, it should be removed. Several methods are used: colonoscopy with the use of special equipment (i.e., biopsy forceps and snares), laparoscopy, or colonoscopic excision with laparoscopic visualization. The latter technique enables immediate detection of potential problems and allows laparoscopic resection and repair of the major complications of perforation and bleeding that may occur with polypectomy. Microscopic examination of the polyp then identifies the type of polyp and indicates what further surgery is required, if any (NIDDK, 2017a).</p>
<p class="SPH1" id="sec19"><strong>DISORDERS OF THE ANORECTUM</strong></p>
<p class="nonindent">Anorectal disorders are common. Patients with anorectal disorders seek medical care primarily because of pain, rectal bleeding, or change in bowel habits. Other common complaints are protrusion of hemorrhoids, anal discharge, perianal itching, swelling, anal tenderness, stenosis, and ulceration. Constipation results from delaying defecation because of anorectal pain.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>