<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1342" title="1342"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 42</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Assessment and Management of Patients with Obesity</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe the causes, risks, and pathophysiology associated with obesity.</span></li>
<li><span>Discriminate between normal and abnormal assessment findings identified in the patient with obesity.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify strategies aimed at preventing and treating obesity, including lifestyle modification, pharmacologic therapy, and nonsurgical interventions.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain nursing management considerations for the patient with obesity using nonsurgical interventions.</span></li>
<li><span>Compare and contrast surgical modalities indicated to treat patients with obesity in terms of preoperative, postoperative, and long-term management and complications.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient who undergoes bariatric surgery.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Assessment</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Metabolism</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">adiposopathy:</span> dysfunction of adipose tissue that causes chronic inflammation and disease</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">bariatric:</span> relating to obesity; term derives from two Greek words meaning &#x201C;weight&#x201D; and &#x201C;treatment&#x201D;</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">body mass index (BMI):</span> a weight-to-height ratio, calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared; the most common measure used to classify and diagnose obesity</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dumping syndrome:</span> physiologic response to rapid emptying of gastric contents into the jejunum, manifested by nausea, weakness, sweating, palpitations, syncope, and possibly diarrhea (<em>synonym:</em> vagotomy syndrome)</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dysphagia:</span> difficulty swallowing</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">genome:</span> the total complement of individual genes in an organism</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">microbiome:</span> the collective genome of all microbes in a microbiota</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">microbiota:</span> the complement of microbes in a given environment</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">obesity:</span> a disease characterized by an abnormal or excessive accumulation of body fat that impairs health</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">obesogenic:</span> a factor that promotes weight gain and obesity</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">orexigenic:</span> a factor that stimulates appetite</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">satiety:</span> feeling of having eaten sufficient quantities of food</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">Obesity in the United States and globally has reached pandemic proportions. Given the high prevalence of obesity, nurses will encounter adults with obesity in every inpatient and outpatient clinical setting. This chapter describes the etiology, risks, assessment, clinical manifestations, management, and related nursing care of the patient with obesity. The management of patients with obesity using both nonsurgical and surgical treatments is discussed.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>