<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1860">Primary Liver Tumors</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Few cancers originate in the liver. Primary liver tumors usually are associated with chronic liver disease, hepatitis B and C infections, and cirrhosis. HCC is the most common type of primary liver cancer, responsible for 75% of all liver cancers, with more than half a million cases diagnosed each year on a worldwide basis. HCC is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. It is rare in the United States and northern Europe, accounting for fewer than 6 cases per 100,000 inhabitants (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3279">Akinyemiju, Abera, Ahmed, et al., 2017</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>). Other types of primary liver cancer include fibrolamellar carcinoma, angiosarcoma, hepatoblastoma, cholangiocellular carcinoma, and combined hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinoma. HCC is usually nonresectable because of rapid growth and metastasis. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1405" title="1405"></span>If found early, resection of primary liver cancer may be possible; however, early detection is not common.</p>
<p class="indent">Cirrhosis, chronic infection with HBV and HCV, and exposure to certain chemical toxins (e.g., vinyl chloride, arsenic) have been implicated as causes of HCC. Cigarette smoking has also been identified as a risk factor, especially when combined with alcohol (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3304">Petrick, Campbell, Koshiol, et al., 2018</a>). Some evidence suggests that aflatoxin, a metabolite of the fungus <em>Aspergillus flavus,</em> may be a risk factor for HCC. This is especially true in areas where HCC is endemic (i.e., Asia, Africa). Aflatoxin and other similar toxic molds can contaminate food such as ground nuts and grains and may act as co-carcinogens with hepatitis B (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). The risk of contamination is greatest when these foods are stored unrefrigerated in tropical or subtropical climates.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>