<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1851">Drug-Induced Hepatitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Drug-induced liver disease is the most common cause of acute liver failure, accounting for more than 50% of all cases in the United States (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Stravitz &#x0026; Lee, 2019</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Thomas &#x0026; Lewis, 2018</a>). Manifestations of sensitivity to a medication may occur on the first day of its use or not until several months later. Usually, the onset is abrupt, with chills, fever, rash, pruritus, arthralgia, anorexia, and nausea. Later, there may be jaundice, dark urine, and an enlarged and tender liver. After the offending medication is withdrawn, symptoms may gradually subside. However, reactions can be severe, or even fatal, even if the medication is stopped. If fever, rash, or pruritus occurs from any medication, its use should be stopped immediately.</p>
<p class="indent">Although any medication can affect liver function, the use of acetaminophen (found in many OTC medications used to treat fever and pain) has been identified as the leading cause of acute liver failure (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Stravitz &#x0026; Lee, 2019</a>). Other causes commonly associated with liver injury include many anesthetic agents, medications used to treat rheumatic and musculoskeletal disease, antidepressants, psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, and antituberculosis agents (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Stravitz &#x0026; Lee, 2019</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Thomas &#x0026; Lewis, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">A short course of high-dose corticosteroids may be used in patients with severe hypersensitivity reactions, although its efficacy is uncertain. Liver transplantation is an option for drug-induced hepatitis, but outcomes may not be as successful as with other causes of liver failure.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>