<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1801">Jaundice</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The bilirubin concentration in the blood may be increased in the presence of liver disease, if the flow of bile is impeded (e.g., by gallstones in the bile ducts), or if there is excessive destruction of red blood cells. With bile duct obstruction, bilirubin does not enter the intestine; as a consequence, urobilinogen is absent from the urine and decreased in the stool (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Hammer &#x0026; McPhee, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">When the bilirubin concentration in the blood is abnormally elevated, all of the body tissues, including the sclerae and the skin, become tinged yellow or greenish-yellow, a condition known as <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;jaundice:&lt;/b&gt; condition where the body tissues, including the sclerae and the skin, become tinged yellow or greenish-yellow, due to high bilirubin levels">jaundice</button></strong>. Jaundice becomes clinically evident when the serum bilirubin level exceeds 2.0 mg/dL (34 mmol/L) (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Hammer &#x0026; McPhee, 2019</a>). Increased serum bilirubin levels and jaundice may result from impairment of hepatic uptake, conjugation of bilirubin, or excretion of bilirubin into the biliary system. There are several types of jaundice: hemolytic, hepatocellular, and obstructive jaundice, and jaundice due to hereditary hyperbilirubinemia. Hepatocellular and obstructive jaundice are the two types commonly associated with liver disease.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1802">Hemolytic Jaundice</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hemolytic jaundice is the result of an increased destruction of the red blood cells; the effect is that the plasma is rapidly flooded with bilirubin so that the liver, although functioning normally, cannot excrete the bilirubin as quickly as it is formed. This type of jaundice is encountered in patients with hemolytic transfusion reactions and other hemolytic disorders. In these patients, the bilirubin in the blood is predominantly unconjugated or free. Fecal and urine urobilinogen levels are increased, but the urine is free of bilirubin. Patients with this type of jaundice, unless their hyperbilirubinemia is extreme, do not experience symptoms or complications as a result of the jaundice per se. However, prolonged jaundice, even if mild, predisposes to the formation of pigment stones in the gallbladder, and extremely severe jaundice (levels of free bilirubin exceeding 20 to 25 mg/dL) poses a risk for central nervous system effects (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1803">Hepatocellular Jaundice</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hepatocellular jaundice is caused by the inability of damaged liver cells to clear normal amounts of bilirubin from the blood. The cellular damage may be caused by hepatitis viruses, other viruses that affect the liver (e.g., yellow fever virus, Epstein&#x2013;Barr virus), chemical toxins (e.g., carbon tetrachloride, phosphorus, arsenicals, certain medications), or alcohol. Cirrhosis of the liver is a form of hepatocellular disease that may produce jaundice. It is usually associated with excessive alcohol intake, but it may also be a late result of liver cell necrosis caused by viral infection. In prolonged obstructive jaundice, cell damage eventually develops, and both types of jaundice (i.e., obstructive and hepatocellular jaundice) appear together.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with hepatocellular jaundice may be mildly or severely ill, with lack of appetite, nausea, malaise, fatigue, weakness, and possible weight loss. In some cases of hepatocellular disease, jaundice may not be obvious. The serum bilirubin concentration and the urine urobilinogen level may be elevated. In addition, AST and ALT levels may be increased, indicating cellular necrosis. The patient may report headache, chills, and fever if the cause is infectious. Depending on the cause and extent of the liver cell damage, hepatocellular jaundice may be completely reversible.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1804">Obstructive Jaundice</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Obstructive jaundice resulting from extrahepatic obstruction may be caused by occlusion of the bile duct from a gallstone, an inflammatory process, a tumor, or pressure from <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1372" title="1372"></span>an enlarged organ (e.g., liver, gallbladder). The obstruction may also involve the small bile ducts within the liver (i.e., intrahepatic obstruction); this may be caused, for example, by pressure on these channels from inflammatory swelling of the liver or by an inflammatory exudate within the ducts themselves. Intrahepatic obstruction resulting from stasis and inspissation (thickening) of bile within the canaliculi may occur after the ingestion of certain medications, which are referred to as cholestatic agents. These include phenothiazines, antithyroid medications, sulfonylureas, tricyclic antidepressant agents, nitrofurantoin, androgens and estrogens, and some antibiotics.</p>
<p class="indent">Regardless of whether the obstruction is intra- or extrahepatic, and regardless of its cause, bile cannot flow normally into the intestine and becomes backed up into the liver. It is then reabsorbed into the blood and carried throughout the entire body, staining the skin, mucous membranes, and sclerae. It is excreted in the urine, which becomes deep orange and foamy. Because of the decreased amount of bile in the intestinal tract, the stools become light or clay colored. The skin may itch intensely, requiring repeated soothing baths. Dyspepsia and intolerance to fatty foods may develop because of impaired fat digestion in the absence of intestinal bile. In general, AST, ALT, and GGT levels rise only moderately, but bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels are elevated.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1805">Hereditary Hyperbilirubinemia</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hyperbilirubinemia (increased serum bilirubin levels), resulting from any of several inherited disorders, can also produce jaundice. Gilbert syndrome is a familial disorder characterized by an increased level of unconjugated bilirubin that causes jaundice. Although serum bilirubin levels are increased, liver histology and liver function test results are normal, and there is no hemolysis. This syndrome affects 3% to 8% of the population, predominantly males (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Bope &#x0026; Kellerman, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Other conditions that are probably caused by inborn errors of biliary metabolism include Dubin&#x2013;Johnson syndrome (chronic idiopathic jaundice, with pigment in the liver) and Rotor syndrome (chronic familial conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, without pigment in the liver); the &#x201C;benign&#x201D; cholestatic jaundice of pregnancy, with retention of conjugated bilirubin, probably secondary to unusual sensitivity to the hormones of pregnancy; and benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>