<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1867">LIVER TRANSPLANTATION</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Liver transplantation is used to treat life-threatening ESLD for which no other form of treatment is available. The transplantation procedure involves total removal of the diseased liver and replacement with a healthy liver from a deceased donor or with the right lobe from a live donor in the same <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1408" title="1408"></span>anatomic location, referred to as <strong>orthotopic liver transplantation [OLT]</strong>. Removal of the liver creates a space for the new liver and permits anatomic reconstruction of the hepatic vasculature and biliary tract as close to normal as possible.</p>
<p class="indent">The success of liver transplantation depends on successful immunosuppression. Immunosuppressant agents currently used include the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus. Corticosteroids are commonly used for induction immunosuppression. Mycophenolate mofetil blocks lymphocyte proliferation and results in lower dose requirements of calcineurin inhibitors. Target of rapamycin inhibitors sirolimus (formerly known as rapamycin) and everolimus inhibit T- and B-cell proliferation. Antibody therapies such as antithymocyte globulin, basiliximab, and daclizumab deplete lymphocytes and inhibit T-cell proliferation (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). There is no one, accepted, optimal immunosuppressive regimen. Most transplant centers have developed their own therapeutic practices, largely based on experience. Multiple immunosuppressive strategies can be used to prevent transplanted organ rejection. Most strategies involve the use of more than one agent, but current recommendations advise the minimization of immunosuppression in order to avoid toxicity (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). Using multiple immunosuppressive agents has the effect of blocking multiple targets in the immune response cascade. This allows the use of lower doses of each drug, thus avoiding toxicity associated with high doses of these powerful drugs. Some patients are treated with &#x201C;triple therapy&#x201D; using corticosteroids, a calcineurin inhibitor, and either an antiproliferative agent (mycophenolate mofetil) or a target of rapamycin inhibitor (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). Some transplant centers also prescribe steroid-free immunosuppressant regimens after liver transplantation. This regimen has been found to be a safe alternative. Still other transplant centers advocate monotherapy with a calcineurin inhibitor alone to provide long-term immunosuppression (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Cameron &#x0026; Cameron, 2020</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). In order to prevent acute rejection in the early, high-risk months after liver transplantation, some centers employ induction therapy, which is the use of prophylactic, perioperative course of immunosuppressant drugs that suppress the body&#x2019;s response to the foreign, transplanted tissue and may improve graft survival by reducing the risk of acute cellular rejection (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>). Over time, withdrawal of all immunosuppressants is possible but rare; randomized, prospective studies are needed before this clinical practice is accepted.</p>
<p class="indent">Despite the success of immunosuppression in reducing the incidence of rejection of transplanted organs, liver transplantation is not routine and may be accompanied by complications related to the lengthy surgical procedure, immunosuppressive therapy, infection, and technical difficulties encountered in reconstructing the blood vessels and biliary tract. Long-standing systemic problems resulting from the primary liver disease may complicate the pre- and postoperative course. Previous surgery of the abdomen, including procedures to treat complications of advanced liver disease (i.e., shunt procedures used to treat portal hypertension, esophageal varices) increase the complexity of the transplantation procedure.</p>
<p class="indent">General indications for liver transplantation include irreversible advanced chronic liver disease, ALF, metabolic liver diseases, and some hepatic malignancies. Examples of disorders that are indications for liver transplantation include hepatocellular liver diseases (e.g., viral hepatitis, drug- or alcohol-induced liver disease, Wilson disease) and cholestatic diseases (primary biliary cirrhosis, sclerosing cholangitis, NASH, and biliary atresia).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient being considered for liver transplantation frequently has many systemic problems that influence pre- and postoperative care. Because transplantation is more difficult if the patient has developed severe GI bleeding and hepatic coma, efforts are made to perform the procedure before the disease progresses to this stage. The patient must undergo a thorough evaluation of hepatic reserve and general health. Part of this evaluation includes classification of the degree of medical need, an objective determination known as the MELD classification, which stratifies the level of illness of those awaiting a liver transplant. The MELD score is derived from a complex formula incorporating bilirubin levels, PT/INR, creatinine, and the cause of the liver disease (i.e., cholestatic, alcoholic, or other). The MELD score is an indicator of short-term mortality for those with ESLD. Organs are allocated using the MELD score in an effort to provide transplants to the most severely ill patients (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Friedman &#x0026; Martin, 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Liver transplantation is an established therapeutic modality, and the number of liver transplant centers is increasing. Patients requiring transplantation are often referred from distant hospitals to these centers. To prepare the patient and family for liver transplantation, nurses in all settings must understand the processes and procedures of liver transplantation.</p>
<p class="indent">Many ethical issues arise concerning liver transplantation, particularly concerning the allocation of organs. The way in which some persons contracted liver disease (e.g., alcohol use, hepatitis) leads others to question allocation of organs to them, and some believe that preference should be given to people who need liver transplants but do not have a history of socially unacceptable behavior. More issues arise when a patient requires a second transplant operation because of a return to alcohol or drug use or failure to follow immunosuppressive regimens. Transplant recipients must go through a rigorous selection and preparation process that includes counseling and education to aid them in making critical choices for their improved health. Nurses and other health care providers need to be aware of and confront their own biases and work toward improved understanding and acceptance.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>