<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1826">Other Manifestations of Hepatic Dysfunction</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1827">Edema and Bleeding</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many patients with liver dysfunction develop generalized edema caused by hypoalbuminemia due to decreased hepatic production of albumin. The production of blood clotting factors by the liver is also reduced, leading to an increased incidence of bruising, epistaxis, bleeding from wounds, and, as described previously, GI bleeding. Abnormalities in the number and effectiveness of platelets also contribute to the bleeding in liver dysfunction. Congestion of the spleen secondary to portal hypertension causes hypersplenism (increased pooling of platelets in the organ). The resultant thrombocytopenia generally correlates with spleen size. In patients who abuse alcohol, suppression of bone marrow by the acute toxic effects of alcohol or folate deficiency may contribute to the thrombocytopenia (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>). These factors predispose patients to easy bruising, petechiae formation, and bleeding from a variety of sources such as the GI or genitourinary tract (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Goldman &#x0026; Shafer, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1828">Vitamin Deficiency</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Decreased production of several clotting factors may be partially due to deficient absorption of vitamin K from the GI tract. This probably is caused by the inability of liver cells to use vitamin K to make prothrombin (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Barrett et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Hammer &#x0026; McPhee, 2019</a>). Absorption of the other fat-soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, and E) as well as dietary fats may also be impaired because of decreased secretion of bile salts into the intestine.</p>
<p class="indent">Another group of problems common to patients with severe chronic liver dysfunction results from inadequate intake of sufficient vitamins. These include the following:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Vitamin A deficiency, resulting in night blindness and eye and skin changes</span></li>
<li><span>Thiamine deficiency, leading to beriberi, polyneuritis, and Wernicke&#x2013;Korsakoff psychosis</span></li>
<li><span>Riboflavin deficiency, resulting in characteristic skin and mucous membrane lesions</span></li>
<li><span>Pyridoxine deficiency, resulting in skin and mucous membrane lesions and neurologic changes</span></li>
<li><span>Vitamin C deficiency, resulting in the hemorrhagic lesions of scurvy</span></li>
<li><span>Vitamin K deficiency, resulting in hypoprothrombinemia, characterized by spontaneous bleeding and ecchymoses</span></li>
<li><span>Folic acid deficiency, resulting in macrocytic anemia</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">Because of these potential vitamin deficiencies, the diet of every patient with chronic liver disease (especially if alcohol related) is supplemented with vitamins A, B complex, C, K, and folic acid (EASL, 2019; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Styskel et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Yao et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1829">Metabolic Abnormalities</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Abnormalities of glucose metabolism also occur; the blood glucose level may be abnormally high shortly after a meal (similar to that when diabetes is present), but hypoglycemia may occur during fasting because of decreased hepatic glycogen reserves and decreased gluconeogenesis. Medications must be used cautiously and in reduced dosages because the ability to metabolize medications is decreased in the patient with liver failure.</p>
<p class="indent">Many endocrine abnormalities also occur with liver dysfunction because the liver cannot properly metabolize hormones, including androgens and sex hormones. Failure of the damaged liver to inactivate estrogens normally can cause gynecomastia, amenorrhea, testicular atrophy, loss of pubic hair in the male, menstrual irregularities in the female, and other disturbances of sexual function and sex characteristics.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1830">Pruritus and Other Skin Changes</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with liver dysfunction resulting from biliary obstruction commonly develop severe pruritus due to retention of bile salts. Patients may develop vascular (or arterial) spider angiomas on the skin (see <a href="c43-sec02.xhtml#ff43-3">Fig. 43-3</a>), usually above the waistline. These are numerous small vessels resembling a spider&#x2019;s legs. They are most often associated with cirrhosis, especially in alcoholic liver disease. Patients may also develop palmar erythema (&#x201C;liver palms&#x201D; or reddened palms).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>