<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1831">VIRAL HEPATITIS</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Viral hepatitis is a systemic, viral infection in which necrosis and inflammation of liver cells produce a characteristic cluster of clinical, biochemical, and cellular changes. To date, five definitive types of viral hepatitis that cause liver disease have been identified: hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. Hepatitis A and E are similar in mode of transmission (fecal&#x2013;oral route), whereas hepatitis B, C, and D share many other characteristics.</p>
<p class="indent">Hepatitis is easily transmitted and causes high morbidity and prolonged loss of time from school or employment. Acute viral hepatitis affects 0.5% to 1% of people in the United States each year. Hepatitis A virus (HAV) was responsible for 3366 cases in the United States in 2017. Incidence rates decreased more than 95% from 1995 to 2011, then increased by 140% from 2011 to 2017. In 2017, large person-to-person <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1385" title="1385"></span>outbreaks began occurring, among persons who use drugs and persons experiencing homelessness (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3285">Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2017</a>). During the same year, the hepatitis B virus (HBV) was the offending agent in a total of 3407 cases of acute viral hepatitis nationwide. The occurrence rate of viral hepatitis C (HCV) in 2017 was 3186 cases, with an incidence of 1.0 cases per 100,000 population, which represents an increase since 2013. Rates have been influenced by the opioid crisis. An estimated 2.4 million people in the United States are living with HCV infection (CDC, 2017).</p>
<p class="indent">The number of reported acute hepatitis B cases has remained stable with a slight increase in 2017. The increase is most likely due to increasing injection drug use related to the opioid crisis, and improved surveillance (CDC, 2017). The overall decrease in HBV rates since 1990 is largely due to the use of hepatitis A and B vaccines, the introduction of universal precautions and blood supply safety measures as well as public health education regarding high-risk behaviors (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>). Conversely, the incidence of HAV and HCV infections has been on the rise. It is estimated that 60% to 90% of viral hepatitis cases go unreported (CDC, 2017). The occurrence of subclinical cases, failure to recognize mild cases, and misdiagnosis are thought to contribute to the underreporting. <a href="#tt43-4">Table 43-4</a> compares the major forms of viral hepatitis.</p>
<p class="indent">The clinical presentation of hepatitis varies with individual patients as well as with the specific causative virus. Four phases of infectious hepatitis describe the clinical presentation. Phase 1 is the viral replication phase in which patients are asymptomatic but laboratory studies will reveal markers of hepatitis. Phase 2 is the preicteric or prodromal phase when those affected may experience anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fatigue and pruritus. Phase 3 is the icteric phase which is characterized by jaundice and dark urine. Some patients experience abdominal pain from an enlarged liver. Phase 4 is the convalescent phase when signs and symptoms resolve and laboratory values return to normal. Not all patients will experience all phases, especially those with a mild form of the disease (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Chi, Cleary, &#x0026; Bocchini, 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Shin, 2018</a>).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt43-4">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;43-4</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Comparison of Major Forms of Viral Hepatitis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<div class="vst-horizontal-scroll-container">
<div class="vst-horizontal-scroll-content">
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="thead">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="thead">Hepatitis A</td>
<td class="thead">Hepatitis B</td>
<td class="thead">Hepatitis C</td>
<td class="thead">Hepatitis D</td>
<td class="thead">Hepatitis E</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="thead"><i>Previous Names</i></td>
<td class="thead">Infectious Hepatitis</td>
<td class="thead">Serum Hepatitis</td>
<td class="thead">Non-A, non-B Hepatitis</td>
<td class="thead">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="thead">&#x00A0;</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1_line" colspan="6">
<p class="td_p"><b>Epidemiology</b></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Cause</i></p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p">Hepatitis A virus (HAV)</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p">Hepatitis B virus (HBV)</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p">Hepatitis C virus (HCV)</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p">Hepatitis D virus (HDV)</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p">Hepatitis E virus (HEV)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Immunity</i></p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Average:</i> 30 days</p><p class="td_p">Homologous</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Average:</i> 70&#x2013;80 days</p><p class="td_p">Homologous</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Average:</i> 50 days</p><p class="td_p">Second attack may indicate weak immunity or infection with another agent.</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Average:</i> 35 days</p><p class="td_p">Homologous</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="td_p"><i>Average:</i> 31 days</p><p class="td_p">Unknown</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2_line" colspan="6">
<p class="td_p"><b>Nature of Illness</b></p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p"><i>Signs and symptoms</i></p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">May occur with or without symptoms; flu-like illness</p><p class="td_p"><i>Preicteric phase:</i> Headache, malaise, fatigue, anorexia, fever</p><p class="td_p"><i>Icteric phase:</i> Dark urine, jaundice of sclera and skin, tender liver</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">May occur without symptoms</p><p class="td_p">May develop arthralgias, rash</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Similar to HBV; less severe and anicteric</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Similar to HBV</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Similar to HAV; very severe in pregnant women</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p"><i>Outcome</i></p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Usually mild with recovery. No carrier state or increased risk of chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, or hepatic cancer.</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">May be severe. Carrier state possible. Increased risk of chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatic cancer.</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Frequent occurrence of chronic carrier state and chronic liver disease, but effective therapies that provide a sustained virologic response (SVR) are available. SVR is indicative of a cure of HCV infection. Increased risk of hepatic cancer if disease is not treated.</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Similar to HBV but greater likelihood of carrier state, chronic active hepatitis, and cirrhosis</p></td>
<td class="td2r"><p class="td_p">Similar to HAV except very severe in pregnant women</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="foot_r">Adapted from Goldman, L., &#x0026; Schafer, A. I. (2019). <i>Goldman&#x2019;s Cecil medicine</i> (26th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier.</p>
</div>
</div></div>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>