<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1800"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1371" title="1371"></span>MANIFESTATIONS OF HEPATIC DYSFUNCTION</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hepatic dysfunction results from damage to the liver&#x2019;s parenchymal cells, directly from primary liver diseases, or indirectly from either obstruction of bile flow or derangements of hepatic circulation. Liver dysfunction may be acute or chronic; the latter is far more common.</p>
<p class="indent">Chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis, is the 12th leading cause of death in the United States among young and middle-aged adults (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>). At least 40% of those deaths are associated with alcohol use. The rate of chronic liver disease for men is twice that for women, and chronic liver disease is more common in Asian and African countries than it is in Europe and the United States. Compensated cirrhosis, in which the damaged liver is still able to perform normal functions, often goes undetected for extended periods, and as many as 1% of people may have subclinical or compensated cirrhosis (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Bope &#x0026; Kellerman, 2018</a>; <a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>). Approximately 80% of patients diagnosed with cirrhosis compensate and remain asymptomatic for the next 10 years (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Schiff et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Disease processes that lead to hepatocellular dysfunction may be caused by infectious agents such as bacteria and viruses and by anoxia, metabolic disorders, toxins and medications, nutritional deficiencies, and hypersensitivity states. The most common cause of parenchymal damage is malnutrition, especially that related to alcoholism (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Moon, Singal, &#x0026; Tapper, 2018</a>). It is important to remember that even patients who are overweight or have obesity may suffer from not only malnutrition related to liver disease, but also from sarcopenia, the significant loss of muscle tissue. Sarcopenia is associated with increased morbidity and mortality in patients with end-stage liver disease (ESLD) (<a href="c43-sec28.xhtml#bib3334">Aby &#x0026; Saab, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The parenchymal cells respond to most noxious agents by replacing glycogen with lipids, producing fatty infiltration with or without cell death or necrosis. This is commonly associated with inflammatory cell infiltration and growth of fibrous tissue. Cell regeneration can occur if the disease process is not too toxic to the cells. The result of chronic parenchymal disease is the shrunken, fibrotic liver seen in cirrhosis.</p>
<p class="indent">The consequences of liver disease are numerous and varied. Their ultimate effects are often incapacitating or life-threatening, and their presence is ominous. Among the most common and significant manifestations of liver disease are jaundice, portal hypertension, ascites and varices, nutritional deficiencies (resulting from the inability of damaged liver cells to metabolize certain vitamins), and <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hepatic encephalopathy:&lt;/b&gt; central nervous system dysfunction frequently associated with elevated ammonia levels that produce changes in mental status, altered level of consciousness, and coma">hepatic encephalopathy</button></strong> or coma.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>