<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1903">Pancreatic Cysts</h4>
<p class="nonindent">As a result of the local necrosis that occurs because of acute pancreatitis, collections of fluid may form close to the pancreas. These fluid collections become walled off by fibrous tissue and are called <em>pancreatic pseudocysts.</em> Pseudocysts are amylase-rich fluid collections contained within a wall of fibrous granulation tissue and develop within 4 to 6 weeks after an episode of acute pancreatitis. They are a result of pancreatic necrosis, which produces a pancreatic ductal leak into pancreatic tissue weakened by extravasating enzymes (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Feldman et al., 2016</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>). Pseudocysts are distinguished from true cysts by the characteristics of the lining of the walls of these anomalies. The lining of pseudocysts consists of fibrous granulation tissue, whereas true cysts have epithelium-lined walls (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3355">Bansal, Gupta, Singh, et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Feldman et al., 2016</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Papadakis &#x0026; McPhee, 2020</a>). Pseudocysts are the most common type of pancreatic &#x201C;cyst.&#x201D; Less common cysts occur as a result of congenital anomalies or secondary to chronic pancreatitis or trauma to the pancreas.</p>
<p class="indent">Diagnosis of pancreatic cysts and pseudocysts is made by ultrasound, CT scan, and ERCP. ERCP may be used to identify the anatomy of the pancreas and evaluate the patency of pancreatic drainage. Pancreatic pseudocysts may be of considerable size. When pancreatic pseudocysts enlarge, they impinge on and displace the adjacent stomach or the colon because of the location of pseudocysts behind the posterior peritoneum. Eventually, through pressure or secondary infection, they produce symptoms and require drainage.</p>
<p class="indent">Drainage into the GI tract or through the skin and abdominal wall may be established. In the latter instance, the drainage is likely to be profuse and destructive to tissue because of the enzyme contents. Hence, steps (including application of skin ointment) must be taken to protect the skin near the drainage site from excoriation. A suction apparatus may be used to continuously aspirate digestive secretions from the drainage tract so that skin contact with the digestive enzymes is avoided. Expert nursing attention is required to ensure that the suction tube does not become dislodged and suction is not interrupted. Consultation with a WOC nurse is indicated to identify appropriate strategies for maintaining drainage and protecting the skin.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>