<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1914">Pancreatic Islet Tumors</h4>
<p class="nonindent">At least two types of tumors of the pancreatic islet cells are known: those that secrete insulin (insulinoma) and those in which insulin secretion is not increased (nonfunctioning islet cell cancer). All of these types of tumors combined are termed <em>neuroendocrine tumors</em> (NETs). Insulinomas produce hypersecretion of insulin and cause an excessive rate of glucose metabolism. The resulting hypoglycemia may produce symptoms of weakness, mental confusion, and seizures. These symptoms may be relieved almost immediately by oral or IV administration of glucose. The 5-hour glucose tolerance test is helpful to diagnose insulinoma and to distinguish a diagnosis of NET from other causes of hypoglycemia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1915">Surgical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">If a tumor of the islet cells (a type of NET) has been diagnosed, surgical treatment with removal of the tumor is usually recommended (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Brunicardi, 2019</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Yeo, 2019</a>). The tumors may be benign adenomas, or they may be malignant. Complete removal usually results in almost immediate relief of symptoms. In some patients, symptoms may be produced by simple hypertrophy of this tissue rather than a tumor of the islet cells. In such cases, a partial pancreatectomy (removal of the tail and part of the body of the pancreas) is performed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1916">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In preparing the patient for surgery, the nurse must be alert for symptoms of hypoglycemia and be ready to administer glucose as prescribed if symptoms occur. Postoperatively, the nursing management is the same as after other upper abdominal surgical procedures, with special emphasis on monitoring serum glucose levels. Patient education is determined by the extent of surgery and alterations in pancreatic function.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>