<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1885">Cholecystitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;cholecystitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of the gallbladder which can be acute or chronic">Cholecystitis</button></strong> (inflammation of the gallbladder which can be acute or chronic) causes pain, tenderness, and rigidity of the upper right abdomen that may radiate to the midsternal area or right shoulder and is associated with nausea, vomiting, and the usual signs of an acute inflammation. An empyema of the gallbladder develops if the gallbladder becomes filled with purulent fluid (pus).</p>
<p class="indent">Calculous cholecystitis is the cause of more than 90% of cases of acute cholecystitis (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Brunicardi, 2019</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Cameron &#x0026; Cameron, 2020</a>). In calculous cholecystitis, a gallbladder stone obstructs bile outflow. Bile remaining in the gallbladder initiates a chemical reaction; autolysis and edema occur; and the blood vessels in the gallbladder are compressed, compromising its vascular supply. Gangrene of the gallbladder with perforation may result. Bacteria play a minor role in acute cholecystitis; however, secondary infection of bile occurs in approximately 50% of cases. The organisms involved are generally enteric (normally live in the GI tract) and include <em>Escherichia coli, Klebsiella</em> species, and <em>Streptococcus.</em> Bacterial contamination is not believed to stimulate the actual onset of acute cholecystitis (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Feldman, Friedman, &#x0026; Brandt, 2016</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Goldman &#x0026; Schafer, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Acalculous cholecystitis describes acute gallbladder inflammation in the absence of obstruction by gallstones. Acalculous cholecystitis occurs after major surgical procedures, orthopedic procedures, severe trauma, or burns. Other factors associated with this type of cholecystitis include torsion, cystic duct obstruction, primary bacterial infections of the gallbladder, and multiple blood transfusions. It is speculated that acalculous cholecystitis is caused by alterations in fluids and electrolytes and alterations in regional blood flow in the visceral circulation. Bile stasis (lack of gallbladder contraction) and increased viscosity of the bile are also thought to play a role. The occurrence of acalculous cholecystitis with major surgical procedures or trauma makes its diagnosis difficult (<a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Brunicardi, 2019</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Cameron &#x0026; Cameron, 2020</a>; <a href="c44-sec14.xhtml#bib3385">Hammer &#x0026; McPhee, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>