<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1931">THE PITUITARY GLAND</h4>
<h4 class="h4" id="s1932"><strong>Anatomic and Physiologic Overview</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">The pituitary gland, or hypophysis, is commonly referred to as the master gland because of the influence it has on secretion of hormones by other endocrine glands (see <a href="c45-sec02.xhtml#ff45-2">Fig. 45-2</a>). The round structure, about 1.27 cm (1/2 inch) in diameter, is located on the inferior aspect of the brain and is divided into anterior and posterior lobes. The gland is controlled by the hypothalamus, which is an adjacent area of the brain that is connected to the pituitary by the pituitary stalk.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1933">Anterior Pituitary</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The major hormones of the anterior pituitary gland are FSH, luteinizing hormone (LH), prolactin (PRL), <strong>adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)</strong>, <strong>thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)</strong>, and GH (also referred to as somatotropin). The secretion of these major hormones is controlled by releasing <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1450" title="1450"></span>factors secreted by the hypothalamus. These releasing factors reach the anterior pituitary by way of the bloodstream in a special circulation called the <em>pituitary portal blood system.</em> Other hormones include melanocyte-stimulating hormone and beta-lipotropin; the function of lipotropin is poorly understood.</p>
<p class="indent">The hormones released by the anterior pituitary enter the general circulation and are transported to their target organs. The main function of TSH, ACTH, FSH, and LH is the release of hormones from other endocrine glands. Imbalanced ACTH secretion characterizes both Addison&#x2019;s disease (hypoproduction) and Cushing&#x2019;s syndrome (hyperproduction). PRL acts on the breast to stimulate milk production. Hormones that stimulate other organs and tissues are discussed in conjunction with their target organs.</p>
<p class="indent">GH, the most abundant anterior pituitary hormone, regulates growth in children and energy and metabolism in adults. GH increases protein synthesis in many tissues, increases the breakdown of fatty acids in adipose tissue, and increases blood glucose levels. Other hormones, such as thyroid hormone and insulin, are required for the GH system to function as well. Secretion of GH is increased by deep sleep, stress, exercise, fasting, malnutrition, hypoglycemia, trauma, hypovolemic shock, and sepsis, and is decreased in the presence of obesity, depression, and hypothyroidism (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1934">Posterior Pituitary</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The important hormones secreted by the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland are <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;vasopressin:&lt;/b&gt; antidiuretic hormone secreted by the posterior pituitary">vasopressin</button></strong>, also referred to as antidiuretic hormone (ADH), and oxytocin. These hormones are synthesized in the hypothalamus and travel from the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary gland for storage. Vasopressin controls the excretion of water by the kidney; its secretion is stimulated by an increase in the osmolality of the blood or by a decrease in blood pressure. Oxytocin secretion is stimulated during pregnancy and at childbirth. Oxytocin also facilitates milk ejection during lactation and increases the force of uterine contractions during labor and delivery.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>