<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1942">Diabetes Insipidus</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a rare disorder that occurs due to injury to the hypothalamus or pituitary gland with a deficiency of ADH (vasopressin) that results in excretion of large volumes of dilute urine and extreme thirst. DI is characterized as central, nephrogenic, or dipsogenic, as well as gestational (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Hollar &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The primary etiology for central DI is head trauma but other causes include surgery, infection, inflammation, brain tumors, or cerebral vascular disease; it also may be idiopathic. Nephrogenic DI etiologic factors include kidney injury, medications such as lithium, hypokalemia, and hypercalcemia. Dipsogenic DI is caused by a defect in the hypothalamus and may be the result of damage to the pituitary gland from a head injury, surgery, infection, inflammatory process, or a tumor (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3423">National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2019</a>). DI must be differentiated from diabetes, which may also cause polydipsia and excessive urination.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1943">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Without the action of ADH on the distal nephron of the kidney, an enormous daily output (greater than 250 mL per hour) of very dilute urine with a specific gravity of 1.001 to 1.005 occurs (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Hollar &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019</a>). The urine contains no abnormal substances such as glucose or albumin. Because of the intense thirst, the patient tends to drink 2 to 20 L of fluid daily and craves cold water. In adults, the onset of DI may be insidious or abrupt.</p>
<p class="indent">The disease cannot be controlled by limiting fluid intake, because the high-volume loss of urine continues even without fluid replacement. Attempts to restrict fluids cause the patient to experience an insatiable craving for fluid and to develop hypernatremia and severe dehydration.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1944">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The fluid deprivation test is carried out by withholding fluids for 8 to 12 hours or until 3% to 5% of the body weight is lost. The patient is weighed frequently during the test. Plasma and urine osmolality studies are performed at the beginning and end of the test. The inability to increase the specific gravity and osmolality of the urine is characteristic of DI. The patient continues to excrete large volumes of urine with low specific gravity and experiences weight loss, increasing serum osmolality, and elevated serum sodium levels. The patient&#x2019;s condition needs to be monitored frequently during the test, and the test is terminated if tachycardia, excessive weight loss, or hypotension develops.</p>
<p class="indent">Other diagnostic procedures include concurrent measurements of plasma levels of ADH and plasma and urine osmolality as well as a trial of desmopressin therapy and intravenous (IV) infusion of hypertonic saline solution. If the diagnosis is confirmed and the cause (e.g., head injury) is not obvious, the patient is carefully assessed for tumors that may be causing the disorder.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1451</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1452" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1452">p. 1452</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1945">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The objectives of therapy are to replace ADH (which is usually a long-term therapeutic program), ensure adequate fluid replacement, and identify and correct the underlying intracranial pathology. Nephrogenic causes require different management approaches (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Hollar &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Desmopressin, a synthetic vasopressin without the vascular effects of natural ADH, is the drug of choice for central DI. The drug may be given orally or intranasally (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>). Vasopressin causes vasoconstriction; therefore, it must be used cautiously in patients with coronary artery disease. Chlorpropamide and thiazide diuretics are also used in mild forms of the disease because they potentiate the action of vasopressin but are used with caution due to the risk for hypoglycemia (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">If the DI is renal in origin, the previously described treatments are ineffective. Thiazide diuretics, mild salt depletion, and prostaglandin inhibitors (e.g., indomethacin and aspirin) are used to treat the nephrogenic form of DI.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1946">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Ongoing physical assessment and patient education are the pillars of skilled nursing management of the patient with a diagnosis of DI. Initially, the nurse reviews the patient history and physical assessment and monitors for clinical manifestations of dehydration. Severe dehydration can lead to decreased cardiac output and, therefore, decreased perfusion of the vital organs, specifically the brain and kidneys. Ongoing monitoring of vital signs as well as intake and output (I&#x0026;O) is essential. The nurse is responsible to educate the patient, family, and other caregivers about follow-up care, prevention of complications, and emergency measures. Specific verbal and written instructions should include the dose, actions, side effects, and administration of all medications and the signs and symptoms of hyponatremia. The nurse should demonstrate and observe a return demonstration of medication administration to ensure that the patient received the prescribed dosage. The patient should be advised to wear a medical identification bracelet and carry required medication and information about DI at all times.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>