<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s1991"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1474" title="1474"></span>THE ADRENAL GLANDS</h4>
<h4 class="h4" id="s1992"><strong>Anatomic and Physiologic Overview</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Each person has two adrenal glands, one attached to the upper portion of each kidney. Each adrenal gland is, in reality, two endocrine glands with separate, independent functions. The adrenal medulla at the center of the gland secretes catecholamines, and the outer portion of the gland, the adrenal cortex, secretes steroid hormones (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>). The secretion of hormones from the adrenal cortex is regulated by the hypothalamic&#x2013;pituitary&#x2013;adrenal axis. The hypothalamus secretes corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which stimulates the pituitary gland to secrete ACTH, which in turn stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete glucocorticoid hormone (cortisol). Increased levels of the adrenal hormone then inhibit the production or secretion of CRH and ACTH. This system is an example of a negative feedback mechanism.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1993">Adrenal Medulla</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The adrenal medulla functions as part of the autonomic nervous system. Stimulation of preganglionic sympathetic nerve fibers, which travel directly to the cells of the adrenal medulla, causes release of the catecholamine hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. About 90% of the secretion of the human adrenal medulla is epinephrine (also called <em>adrenaline</em>). Catecholamines regulate metabolic pathways to promote catabolism of stored fuels to meet caloric needs from endogenous sources. The major effects of epinephrine release are to prepare to meet a challenge (fight-or-flight response). Secretion of epinephrine causes decreased blood flow to tissues that are not needed in emergency situations, such as the GI tract, and increased blood flow to tissues that are important for effective fight or flight, such as cardiac and skeletal muscle. Catecholamines also induce the release of free fatty acids, increase the basal metabolic rate, and elevate the blood glucose level.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1994">Adrenal Cortex</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A functioning adrenal cortex is necessary for life; adrenocortical secretions make it possible for the body to adapt to stress of all kinds. The three types of steroid hormones produced by the adrenal cortex are glucocorticoids, mainly cortisol; mineralocorticoids, mainly aldosterone; and sex hormones, mainly androgens (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>). Without the adrenal cortex, severe stress would cause peripheral circulatory failure, circulatory shock, and prostration. Survival in the absence of a functioning adrenal cortex is possible only with nutritional, electrolyte, and fluid replacement and appropriate replacement with exogenous adrenocortical hormones.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Glucocorticoids</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;glucocorticoids:&lt;/b&gt; steroid hormones secreted by the adrenal cortex in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone; produce a rise of liver glycogen and blood glucose">glucocorticoids</button></strong> are so named because they have an important influence on glucose metabolism: Increased cortisol secretion results in elevated blood glucose levels. However, the glucocorticoids have major effects on the metabolism of almost all organs of the body. Glucocorticoids are secreted from the adrenal cortex in response to the release of ACTH from the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. This system represents an example of negative feedback. The presence of glucocorticoids in the blood inhibits the release of CRH from the hypothalamus and also inhibits ACTH secretion from the pituitary. The resultant decrease in ACTH secretion causes diminished release of glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex.</p>
<p class="indent">Corticosteroids are the classification of drugs that include glucocorticoids. These drugs are given to inhibit the inflammatory response to tissue injury and to suppress allergic manifestations. Their side effects include the development of diabetes, osteoporosis, and peptic ulcer; increased protein breakdown resulting in muscle wasting and poor wound healing; and redistribution of body fat. When large doses of exogenous glucocorticoids are given, the release of ACTH and endogenous glucocorticoids are inhibited. This can cause the adrenal cortex to atrophy. If exogenous glucocorticoid administration is discontinued suddenly, adrenal insufficiency results because of the inability of the atrophied cortex to respond adequately.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Mineralocorticoids</h6>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;mineralocorticoids:&lt;/b&gt; steroid hormones secreted by the adrenal cortex">Mineralocorticoids</button></strong> exert their major effects on electrolyte metabolism. They act principally on the renal tubular and GI epithelium to cause increased sodium ion absorption in exchange for excretion of potassium or hydrogen ions. ACTH only minimally influences aldosterone secretion. It is primarily secreted in response to the presence of angiotensin II in the bloodstream. Angiotensin II is a substance that elevates the blood pressure by constricting arterioles. Its concentration is increased when renin is released from the kidney in response to decreased perfusion pressure. The resultant increased aldosterone levels promote sodium reabsorption by the kidney and the GI tract, which tends to restore blood pressure to normal. The release of aldosterone is also increased by hyperkalemia. Aldosterone is the main hormone for the long-term regulation of sodium balance.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Adrenal Sex Hormones (Androgens)</h6>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;androgens:&lt;/b&gt; male sex hormones">Androgens</button></strong>, the third major type of steroid hormones produced by the adrenal cortex, exert effects similar to those of male sex hormones. The adrenal gland may also secrete small amounts of some estrogens, or female sex hormones. ACTH controls the secretion of adrenal androgens. When secreted in normal amounts, the adrenal androgens have little effect, but when secreted in excess, they produce masculinization in women, feminization in men, or premature sexual development in children. This is called the adrenogenital syndrome.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>