<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1924">Assessment</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The nursing assessment of the patient with endocrine dysfunction includes a health history and physical examination that evaluates the effects of endocrine disorders on the patient.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1925">Health History</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Although specific endocrine disorders are often accompanied by specific clinical symptoms, more general manifestations may also occur. A thorough health history and review of systems are necessary for diagnosis and management of these disorders. Patients should be asked if they have experienced changes in the following areas: energy level, tolerance to heat or cold, weight, thirst, frequency of urination, bowel function, body proportions, muscle mass, fat and fluid distribution, secondary sexual characteristics (e.g., loss or growth of hair), menstrual cycle, memory, concentration, sleep patterns, mood, vision, joint pain, and sexual dysfunction. Documentation is important regarding the severity of these changes, the length of time the patient has experienced these changes, the way in which these changes have affected the patient&#x2019;s ability to carry out activities of daily living, the effect of the changes on the patient&#x2019;s self-perception, and family history.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1926">Physical Assessment</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The physical examination should include vital signs; head-to-toe inspection; and palpation of skin, hair, and thyroid. Findings should be compared with previous findings, if available. Physical, psychological, and behavioral changes should be noted. Examples of changes in physical characteristics on examination may include appearance of facial hair in women, &#x201C;moon face,&#x201D; &#x201C;buffalo hump,&#x201D; <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;exophthalmos:&lt;/b&gt; abnormal protrusion of one or both eyeballs">exophthalmos</button></strong> (abnormal protrusion of one or both eyeballs), vision changes, edema, thinning of the skin, obesity of the trunk, thinness of the extremities, increased size <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1448" title="1448"></span>of the feet and hands, edema, and hypo- or hyperreflexia. The patient may also exhibit changes in mood and behavior such as nervousness, lethargy, and fatigue (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Jensen, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>