<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1938">Pituitary Tumors</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Almost all pituitary tumors are benign and are slow growing. The tumors may be primary or secondary and functional or nonfunctional (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>). Functional tumors secrete pituitary hormones, whereas nonfunctional tumors do not. Pituitary tumors can cause clinical sequelae from the pressure that they exert on adjoining tissues, from the endocrine dysfunction that they cause, or from their dysfunctional effects on target organs. The principal types of pituitary tumors represent an overgrowth of eosinophilic cells, basophilic cells, or chromophobic cells (i.e., cells with no affinity for either eosinophilic or basophilic stains).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1939">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Eosinophilic tumors that develop early in life result in gigantism. The affected person may be more than 7 feet tall and large in all proportions, yet so weak and lethargic that they can hardly stand. If the disorder begins during adult life, the excessive skeletal growth occurs only in the feet, the hands, the superciliary ridge, the molar eminences, the nose, and the chin, giving rise to the clinical picture called <em>acromegaly.</em> However, enlargement involves all tissues and organs of the body, and many of these patients suffer from severe headaches and visual disturbances because the tumors exert pressure on the optic nerves (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>). Assessment of central vision and visual fields may reveal loss of color discrimination, diplopia (double vision), or blindness in a portion of a field of vision. Decalcification of the skeleton, muscular weakness, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1451" title="1451"></span>and endocrine disturbances, similar to those occurring in patients with hyperthyroidism, also are associated with this type of tumor.</p>
<p class="indent">Basophilic tumors give rise to Cushing&#x2019;s syndrome with features largely attributable to hyperadrenalism, including masculinization and amenorrhea in females, truncal obesity, hypertension, osteoporosis, and polycythemia.</p>
<p class="indent">Chromophobic tumors represent 90% of pituitary tumors. These tumors usually produce no hormones but destroy the rest of the pituitary gland, causing hypopituitarism. People with this disease often have obesity, are somnolent, and exhibit fine, scanty hair; dry, soft skin; a pasty complexion; and small bones. They also experience headaches, loss of libido, and visual defects progressing to blindness. Other signs and symptoms include polyuria, polyphagia, a lowering of the <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;basal metabolic rate:&lt;/b&gt; chemical reactions occurring when the body is at rest">basal metabolic rate</button></strong> (chemical reactions occurring when the body is at rest), and a subnormal body temperature (Sadiq &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019b).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1940">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Diagnostic evaluation requires a careful history and physical examination, including assessment of visual acuity and visual fields. CT and MRI scans are used to diagnose the presence and extent of pituitary tumors. Serum levels of pituitary hormones may be obtained along with measurements of hormones of target organs (e.g., thyroid, adrenal) to assist in diagnosis.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1941">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hypophysectomy, or surgical removal of the pituitary gland through a transsphenoidal approach, is the usual treatment. Stereotactic radiation therapy, which requires the use of a neurosurgery-type stereotactic frame, may be used to deliver external-beam radiation therapy precisely to the pituitary tumor with minimal effect on normal tissue (see <a href="c12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a>). Other treatments include conventional radiation therapy, bromocriptine, and octreotide. These medications inhibit the production or release of GH and may bring about marked improvement of symptoms. Octreotide and lanreotide may also be used preoperatively to improve the patient&#x2019;s clinical condition and to shrink the tumor (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3410">American Association of Neurological Surgeons, 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Hypophysectomy is the treatment of choice in patients with Cushing&#x2019;s disease resulting from excessive production of ACTH by a pituitary tumor. Hypophysectomy may also be performed on occasion as a palliative measure to relieve bone pain secondary to metastasis of malignant lesions of the breast and prostate.</p>
<p class="indent">Several approaches are used to remove or destroy the pituitary gland, including surgical removal by transfrontal, subcranial, or oronasal&#x2013;transsphenoidal approaches; irradiation; and cryosurgery. The transsphenoidal approach and the nursing management of a patient undergoing cranial surgery are discussed in <a href="c61.xhtml">Chapter 61</a>. Features or symptoms of acromegaly are unaffected by surgical removal of the tumor.</p>
<p class="indent">The absence of the pituitary gland alters the function of many body systems. Menstruation ceases and infertility occurs after total or near-total ablation of the pituitary gland. Replacement therapy with corticosteroids and thyroid hormone is necessary.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>