<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s1935">Pathophysiology</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Abnormalities of pituitary function are caused by over- or undersecretion of any of the hormones produced or released by the gland. Abnormalities of the anterior and posterior portions of the gland may occur independently. Hypopituitarism, or hypofunction of the pituitary gland, can result from disease of the pituitary gland itself or disease of the hypothalamus; the outcome is essentially the same. Hypopituitarism can result from radiation therapy to the head and neck area. The total destruction of the pituitary gland by trauma, tumor, or vascular lesion removes all stimuli that are normally received by the thyroid, the gonads, and the adrenal glands. This leads to extreme weight loss, emaciation, atrophy of all endocrine glands and organs, hair loss, impotence, amenorrhea, hypometabolism, and hypoglycemia. Coma and death occur if the missing hormones are not replaced (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1936">Anterior Pituitary</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Oversecretion (hypersecretion) of the anterior pituitary gland most commonly involves ACTH or GH and results in <strong>Cushing</strong>&#x2019;s <strong>syndrome</strong> (group of symptoms produced by an oversecretion of ACTH) or acromegaly, respectively. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;acromegaly:&lt;/b&gt; progressive enlargement of peripheral body parts resulting from excessive secretion of growth hormone">Acromegaly</button></strong>, a disorder caused by an excess of GH in adults, results in enlargement of peripheral body parts and soft tissue, after the fusion of the epiphyseal plates has occurred (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Hickey &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019</a>), without an increase in height with an incidence of between 0.2 and 1.1 cases per 100,000 people (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3418">Lavrentaki, Paluzzi, Wass, et al., 2017</a>). Although rare, oversecretion of GH in children before the fusion of epiphyseal growth plates result in pituitary gigantism; a person may grow to be 7 or even 8 feet tall. Conversely, insufficient secretion of GH during childhood can result in generalized limited growth and pituitary dwarfism. Undersecretion (hyposecretion) commonly involves all of the anterior pituitary hormones and is termed <em>panhypopituitarism.</em> In this condition, the thyroid gland, the adrenal cortex, and the gonads atrophy (shrink) because of loss of the tropic-stimulating hormones. Hypopituitarism may result from destruction of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s1937">Posterior Pituitary</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most common disorder related to posterior lobe dysfunction is <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;diabetes insipidus:&lt;/b&gt; condition in which abnormally large volumes of dilute urine are excreted as a result of deficient production of vasopressin">diabetes insipidus</button></strong> (DI), a condition in which abnormally large volumes of dilute urine are excreted as a result of deficient production of vasopressin. DI may occur following surgical treatment of a brain tumor, secondary to nonsurgical brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, infections of the nervous system, post hypophysectomy (removal of the pituitary), failure of renal tubules to respond to ADH, and the use of specific medications (<a href="c45-sec26.xhtml#bib3438">Hollar &#x0026; Silverstein, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>