<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2048">Macrovascular Complications</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Diabetic macrovascular complications result from changes in the medium to large blood vessels. Blood vessel walls thicken, sclerose, and become occluded by plaque that adheres to the vessel walls. Eventually, blood flow is blocked. These atherosclerotic changes tend to occur more often and at an earlier age in patients with diabetes. Coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral vascular disease are the three main types of macrovascular complications that occur frequently in patients with diabetes.</p>
<p class="indent">Myocardial infarction (MI) is twice as common in men with diabetes and three times as common in women with diabetes, compared with people without diabetes. There is also an increased risk of complications resulting from MI and an increased likelihood of a second MI. Coronary artery disease accounts for an increased incidence of death among patients with diabetes. The typical ischemic symptoms may be absent in patients with diabetes. Therefore, the patient may not experience the early warning signs of decreased coronary blood flow and may have &#x201C;silent&#x201D; MIs, which may be discovered only as changes on the ECG. In some cases, ECG changes may not be apparent. This lack of ischemic symptoms may be secondary to autonomic neuropathy (see later discussion). See <a href="c23.xhtml">Chapter 23</a> for a detailed discussion of coronary vascular disorders.</p>
<p class="indent">Cerebral blood vessels are similarly affected by accelerated atherosclerosis. Occlusive changes or the formation of an embolus elsewhere in the vasculature that lodges in a cerebral blood vessel can lead to transient ischemic attacks and strokes. People with diabetes have twice the risk of developing cerebrovascular disease and an increased risk of death from stroke (<a href="c46-sec12.xhtml#bib3477">Virani et al., 2020</a>). In addition, recovery from a stroke may be impaired in patients who have elevated blood glucose levels at the time of and immediately after a stroke. Because symptoms of a stroke may be similar to symptoms of acute diabetic complications (HHS or hypoglycemia), it is very important to assess the blood glucose level (and treat abnormal levels) rapidly in patients with these symptoms so that testing and treatment of a stroke can be initiated promptly if indicated.</p>
<p class="indent">Atherosclerotic changes in the large blood vessels of the lower extremities are responsible for the increased incidence (two to three times higher than in people without diabetes) of occlusive peripheral arterial disease in patients with diabetes (ADA, 2020). Signs and symptoms of peripheral vascular disease include diminished peripheral pulses and intermittent claudication (pain in the buttock, thigh, or calf during walking). The severe form of arterial occlusive disease in the lower extremities is largely responsible for the increased incidence of gangrene and subsequent amputation in patients with diabetes. Neuropathy and impairments in wound healing also play a role in diabetic foot disease (see later discussion).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2049">Role of Diabetes in Macrovascular Diseases</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Researchers continue to investigate the relationship between diabetes and macrovascular diseases. The main feature unique to diabetes is elevated blood glucose; however, a direct link has not been found between hyperglycemia and atherosclerosis. Although it may be tempting to attribute the increased prevalence of macrovascular diseases to the increased prevalence of certain risk factors (e.g., obesity, increased triglyceride levels, hypertension) in patients with diabetes, there is a higher-than-expected rate of macrovascular diseases among patients with diabetes compared with patients without diabetes who have the same risk factors (ADA, 2020). Therefore, diabetes itself is seen as an independent risk factor for accelerated atherosclerosis. Other potential factors that may play a role in diabetes-related atherosclerosis include platelet and clotting factor abnormalities, decreased flexibility of red blood cells, decreased oxygen release, changes in the arterial wall related to hyperglycemia, and possibly hyperinsulinemia.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1519</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1520" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1520">p. 1520</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2050">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The focus of management is an aggressive modification and reduction of risk factors. This involves prevention and treatment of the commonly accepted risk factors for atherosclerosis. MNT and exercise are important in managing obesity, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. In addition, the use of medications to control hypertension and hyperlipidemia is indicated. Smoking cessation is essential. Control of blood glucose levels may reduce triglyceride concentrations and can significantly reduce the incidence of complications (ADA, 2020; <a href="c46-sec12.xhtml#bib3477">Evert et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>