<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2071">SPECIAL ISSUES IN DIABETES CARE</h4>
<h4 class="h4" id="s2072"><strong>Patients with Diabetes Who Are Undergoing Surgery</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">During periods of physiologic stress, such as surgery, blood glucose levels tend to increase, because levels of stress hormones (epinephrine, norepinephrine, glucagon, cortisol, and growth hormone) increase. If hyperglycemia is not controlled during surgery, the resulting osmotic diuresis may lead to excessive loss of fluids and electrolytes. Patients with type 1 diabetes also risk developing DKA during periods of stress.</p>
<p class="indent">Hypoglycemia is also a concern in patients with diabetes who are undergoing surgery. This is a special concern during the preoperative period if surgery is delayed beyond the morning in a patient who received a morning injection of intermediate-acting insulin.</p>
<p class="indent">There are various approaches to managing glucose control during the perioperative period. Frequent blood glucose monitoring is essential throughout the pre- and postoperative periods, regardless of the method used for glucose control. Examples of these approaches are described in <a href="c46-sec12.xhtml#ct46-12">Chart 46-12</a>. The use of IV insulin and dextrose has become widespread with the increased availability of intraoperative glucose monitoring.</p>
<p class="indent">During the postoperative period, patients with diabetes must also be closely monitored for cardiovascular complications because of the increased prevalence of atherosclerosis, wound infections, and skin breakdown (especially in patients with decreased sensation in the extremities due to neuropathy). Maintaining adequate nutrition and blood glucose control promote wound healing.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>