<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2133">Polycystic Kidney Disease</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a genetic disorder characterized by the growth of numerous fluid-filled cysts in the kidneys, which destroy the nephrons. PKD cysts can profoundly enlarge the kidneys while replacing much of the normal structure, resulting in reduced kidney function and leading to kidney failure (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Mahaffey, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2134">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with PKD can also have cysts in the liver and pancreas, aneurysms in blood vessels in the brain, and cardiovascular abnormalities. The number of cysts and the resulting complications distinguish PKD from the usually harmless cysts that can form in the kidneys in later years of life.</p>
<p class="indent">PKD is the most common inherited genetic cause of kidney failure (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3533">Bolignano, Palmer, Ruospo, et al., 2015</a>). Two major inherited forms of PKD exist: autosomal dominant PKD and autosomal recessive PKD.</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Autosomal dominant PKD is the most common inherited form (90%). There are two subtypes. PKD1 has a mutation on chromosome 16 and is the most prevalent form with 78% of patients having this mutation. The second subtype is PKD2 with a mutation on chromosome 4. PKD2 progresses more slowly than PKD1. The average age for patients to progress to ESKD is 54.3 years among patients with PKD1 versus 74.0 years among patients with PKD2 (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Torres &#x0026; Bennett, 2019</a>).</span></li>
<li><span>Autosomal recessive PKD is a rare inherited form (10%) of PKD. Symptoms of autosomal recessive PKD begin in the earliest months of life or in utero. Since the gene is recessive, both parents are carriers but neither parent is affected (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Mahaffey, 2017</a>).</span></li></ul>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2135">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Signs and symptoms of PKD result from loss of renal function and the increasing size of the kidneys as the cysts grow. Kidney damage can result in hematuria, hypertension, and development of renal calculi with associated UTIs and proteinuria. As the cysts grow in size and number, the patient reports increasing abdominal fullness and flank pain (back and lower sides).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2136">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">PKD is a genetic disease; therefore, a careful evaluation of family history is necessary. Palpation of the abdomen will often reveal enlarged cystic kidneys. Ultrasound imaging of the kidneys is the preferred technique for diagnosis. Genetic testing is performed if imaging results are uncertain (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Torres &#x0026; Bennett, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2137">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">PKD has no cure, but tolvaptan slows the decrease in kidney function in patients with PKD. The most common side effects are <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;polyuria:&lt;/b&gt; excessive urine production">polyuria</button></strong> (excessive urine production) and rare, but potentially serious liver injury, which is most often reversible when the drug is stopped (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Comerford &#x0026; Durkin, 2020</a>). Other treatments are largely supportive and include blood pressure control, pain management, and antibiotic agents to resolve infections. Once the kidneys fail, RRT is indicated (see later discussion in chapter). Genetic studies and counseling may be indicated, particularly when screening family members for potential kidney donation (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Torres &#x0026; Bennett, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>