<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2108">Nephrosclerosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;nephrosclerosis:&lt;/b&gt; hardening of the renal arteries">Nephrosclerosis</button></strong> (hardening of the renal arteries) is most often due to prolonged hypertension, diabetes, the aging process, and other factors. Individuals with nephrosclerosis generally experience slowly elevating blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, and mild proteinuria (spilling of protein in the urine). Nephrosclerosis is a major cause of CKD and ESKD secondary to many disorders. Groups at increased risk include African Americans, those with uncontrolled hypertension, and individuals with underlying CKD, especially those with diabetic nephropathy. African American patients have an approximate eightfold elevation in the risk of hypertension-induced ESKD (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Mann &#x0026; Hilgers, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2109">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">There are two forms of nephrosclerosis: acute hypertensive and benign. Acute hypertensive nephrosclerosis is often associated with significant and prolonged hypertension. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1558" title="1558"></span>Damage is caused by decreased blood flow to the kidney resulting in patchy necrosis of the renal parenchyma. Over time, fibrosis occurs and glomeruli are destroyed. Untreated, the disease process can progress rapidly. Benign nephrosclerosis can be found in older adults, associated with atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes (<a href="c48-sec15.xhtml#bib3574">Parikh, Haddad, &#x0026; Hebert, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2110">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms are rare early in the disease, even though the urine usually contains protein and occasional casts. CKD and associated signs and symptoms occur late in the disease.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2111">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment of nephrosclerosis is antihypertensive therapy. An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, alone or in combination with other antihypertensive medications, significantly reduces its incidence. See <a href="c27.xhtml">Chapter 27</a> for additional information on hypertension.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>