<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2243">Specific Injuries</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2244">Ureteral Trauma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The main causes of ureteral trauma are motor vehicle crashes, sports injuries, falls, and assaults. Penetrating trauma, such as gunshot wounds, is the most frequent etiology, accounting for 90% of ureteral injuries (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Blair, 2017</a>). Injuries range from contusions to complete transection. Unintentional injury to the ureter may occur during gynecologic or urologic surgery. There are no specific signs or symptoms of ureteral injury; many traumatic injuries are discovered during exploratory surgery. Surgical repair with placement of stents (to divert urine away from an anastomosis) is usually necessary. If the ureteral trauma is not detected and urine leakage continues, fistulas can develop (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2245">Bladder Trauma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Injury to the bladder may occur with pelvic fractures, multiple trauma, or from a blow to the lower abdomen when the bladder is full. Blunt trauma may result in contusion evident as an ecchymosis&#x2014;a large bruise resulting from escape of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1626" title="1626"></span>blood into the tissues and involving a segment of the bladder wall&#x2014;or in rupture of the bladder extraperitoneally, intraperitoneally, or both. Because of the bladder&#x2019;s protected location within the bony pelvis, bladder trauma is relatively uncommon (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Blair, 2017</a>). Complications from these injuries include hemorrhage, shock, sepsis, and extravasation of blood into the tissues, which must be treated promptly.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2246">Urethral Trauma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Urethral injuries usually occur with blunt trauma to the lower abdomen or pelvic region. Many patients with urethral injuries also have associated pelvic fractures. The classic triad of symptoms include blood at the urinary meatus, inability to void, and a distended bladder. Complete rupture is seen more often in children because their urethras are less elastic and tear more easily than the adult urethra. Men have five times the risk of urethral injury than women because of the exposed nature of the male urethra (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Blair, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2247">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goals of management in patients with genitourinary trauma are to control hemorrhage, pain, and infection and to maintain urinary drainage. Genitourinary trauma is frequently associated with kidney trauma (see <a href="c48.xhtml">Chapter 48</a>). Hematocrit and hemoglobin levels are monitored closely; decreasing values can indicate hemorrhage within the genitourinary system. The patient is also monitored for oliguria, signs of hemorrhagic shock, and signs and symptoms of acute peritonitis.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">In urethral trauma, a patient whose condition is unstable and who needs monitoring of urine output may need a suprapubic catheter inserted. The patient is catheterized after urethrography has been performed to minimize the risk of urethral disruption and extensive, long-term complications, such as stricture, incontinence, and impotence. Surgical repair may be performed using either open or laparoscopic approaches (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Blair, 2017</a>). After surgery, an indwelling urinary catheter may remain in place for 1 to 2 months to allow the system to heal.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2248">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient with genitourinary trauma should be assessed frequently during the first few days after injury to detect flank and abdominal pain, muscle spasm, and swelling over the flank.</p>
<p class="indent">During this time, patients are educated about care of the incision and the importance of adequate fluid intake. In addition, instructions about changes that should be reported to the primary provider, such as fever, hematuria, flank pain, or any signs and symptoms of decreasing kidney function, are provided (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Blair, 2017</a>). The patient with a ruptured bladder may have gross bleeding for several days after repair. Guidelines for increasing activity gradually, lifting, and driving are also provided.</p>
<p class="indent">Follow-up nursing care includes monitoring the blood pressure to detect hypertension and advising the patient to restrict activities for about 1 month after trauma to minimize the incidence of delayed or secondary bleeding.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>