<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2223">Urinary Retention</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Urinary retention is the inability to empty the bladder completely during attempts to void. Chronic urine retention often leads to overflow incontinence (described previously). In a healthy adult younger than 60 years, complete bladder emptying should occur with each voiding, with no residual. In adults older than 60 years, 50 to 100 mL of residual urine may remain after each voiding because of the decreased contractility of the detrusor muscle.</p>
<p class="indent">Urinary retention can occur postoperatively in any patient, particularly if the surgery affected the perineal or anal regions and resulted in reflex spasm of the sphincters. General anesthesia reduces bladder muscle innervation and suppresses the urge to void, impeding bladder emptying.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2224">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Urinary retention may result from diabetes, prostatic enlargement, urethral pathology (infection, tumor, calculus), trauma (pelvic injuries), pregnancy, or neurologic disorders (e.g., stroke, spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson&#x2019;s disease). Some medications cause urinary retention either by inhibiting bladder contractility or by increasing bladder outlet resistance (AUA, 2019b; Wooldridge, 2017).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2225">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The assessment of a patient for urinary retention is multifaceted because the signs and symptoms are challenging to detect. The following questions serve as a guide in assessment:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>What was the time of the last voiding, and how much urine was voided?</span></li>
<li><span>Is the patient voiding small amounts of urine frequently?</span></li>
<li><span>Is the patient dribbling urine?</span></li>
<li><span>Does the patient complain of pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen? (Discomfort may be relatively mild if the bladder distends slowly.)</span></li>
<li><span>Is the pelvic area rounded and swollen (could indicate urine retention and a distended bladder)?</span></li>
<li><span>Does percussion of the suprapubic region elicit dullness (possibly indicating urine retention and a distended bladder)?</span></li>
<li><span>Are other indicators of urinary retention present, such as restlessness and agitation?</span></li>
<li><span>Does a postvoid bladder ultrasound test reveal residual urine?</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The patient may verbalize an awareness of bladder fullness and a sensation of incomplete bladder emptying. Signs and symptoms of UTI (hematuria, urgency, frequency, and nocturia) may be present. A series of urodynamic studies (described in <a href="c47.xhtml">Chapter 47</a>) may be performed to identify the type of bladder dysfunction and to aid in determining appropriate treatment. A voiding diary can be used to provide a written record of the amount of urine voided and the frequency of voiding. Postvoid residual urine may be assessed by using either straight catheterization or an ultrasound bladder scanner (see <a href="c47.xhtml">Chapter 47</a>, <a href="c47-sec03.xhtml#ff47-8">Fig.&#x00A0;47-8</a>) and is considered diagnostic of urinary retention. Normally, residual urine amounts to no more than 50 mL in the middle-aged adult and less than 50 to 100 mL in the older adult (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Weber &#x0026; Kelley, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2226">Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The retention of urine can lead to chronic infections that, if unresolved, predispose the patient to renal calculi (urolithiasis or nephrolithiasis), pyelonephritis, sepsis, or hydronephrosis. In addition, urine leakage can lead to perineal skin breakdown, especially if regular hygiene measures are neglected.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2227">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Strategies are instituted to prevent overdistention of the bladder and to treat infection or correct obstruction. However, many complications can be prevented with careful assessment and appropriate nursing interventions. The nurse explains to the patient why normal voiding is not occurring and monitors urine output closely. The nurse also provides reassurance about the temporary nature of retention and successful management strategies.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Promoting Urinary Elimination</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Nursing measures to encourage normal voiding patterns include providing privacy, ensuring an environment and body position conducive to voiding, and assisting the patient with the use of the bathroom or bedside commode, rather than a bedpan, to provide a more natural setting for voiding. If his condition allows, the male patient may stand beside the bed to use the urinal; most men find this position more comfortable and natural.</p>
<p class="indent">Additional measures include applying warmth to relax the sphincters (e.g., sitz baths, warm compresses to the perineum, showers), giving the patient hot caffeine-free beverage and offering encouragement and reassurance. Simple trigger techniques, such as turning on the water faucet while the patient is trying to void, may also be used. Other examples of trigger techniques are stroking the abdomen or inner thighs, tapping above the pubic area, and dipping the patient&#x2019;s hands in warm water. After surgery or childbirth, prescribed analgesic agents should be given because pain in the perineal area can make voiding difficult. A combination of techniques may be necessary to initiate voiding.</p>
<p class="indent">When the patient cannot void, bladder scanning is used to assess for distention, then straight catheterization (as prescribed) is used to prevent overdistention of the bladder (see later discussion of neurogenic bladder and catheterization). In the case of prostatic obstruction, attempts at catheterization (by the urologist) may not be successful, requiring insertion of a <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;suprapubic catheter:&lt;/b&gt; a urinary catheter that is inserted through a suprapubic incision into the bladder">suprapubic catheter</button></strong> (catheter inserted through a small abdominal incision into the bladder) (see <a href="c49-sec08.xhtml#ff49-4">Fig.&#x00A0;49-4</a>, below). After urinary drainage is restored, bladder retraining is initiated for the patient who cannot void spontaneously.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Promoting Home, Community-Based, and Transitional Care</h6>
<p class="nonindent">In addition to the strategies listed for promoting urinary continence found in <a href="c49-sec05.xhtml#ct49-8">Chart&#x00A0;49-8</a>, modifications to the home environment can provide simple and effective ways to assist in treating urinary incontinence and retention. For example, the patient may need to remove obstacles, such as throw rugs or other objects, to provide easy, safe access to the bathroom. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1617" title="1617"></span>Other modifications that the nurse may recommend include installing support bars in the bathroom; placing a bedside commode, bedpan, or urinal within easy reach; leaving lights on in the bedroom and bathroom; and wearing clothing that is easy to remove quickly.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>