<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2228">Neurogenic Bladder</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Neurogenic bladder is a dysfunction that results from a disorder or dysfunction of the nervous system and leads to urinary incontinence. It may be caused by spinal cord injury, spinal tumor, herniated vertebral disc, multiple sclerosis, congenital disorders (spina bifida or myelomeningocele), infection, or complications of diabetes (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Alley, 2017</a>) (see <a href="c63.xhtml">Chapters&#x00A0;63</a> and <a href="c64.xhtml">64</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2229">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The two types of neurogenic bladder are spastic (or reflex) bladder and flaccid bladder. Spastic bladder is the more common type and is caused by any spinal cord lesion above the voiding reflex arc (upper motor neuron lesion) (<a href="c49-sec17.xhtml#bib3614">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). The result is a loss of conscious sensation and cerebral motor control. A spastic bladder empties on reflex, with minimal or no controlling influence to regulate its activity.</p>
<p class="indent">Flaccid bladder is caused by a lower motor neuron lesion, commonly resulting from trauma. This form of neurogenic bladder is also increasingly being recognized in patients with diabetes. The bladder continues to fill and becomes greatly distended, and overflow incontinence occurs. The bladder muscle does not contract forcefully at any time. Because sensory loss may accompany a flaccid bladder, the patient feels no discomfort.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2230">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Evaluation for neurogenic bladder involves measurement of fluid intake, urine output, and residual urine volume; urinalysis; and assessment of sensory awareness of bladder fullness and degree of motor control. Comprehensive urodynamic studies are also performed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2231">Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most common complication of neurogenic bladder is infection resulting from urinary stasis and catheterization. Other complications include renal calculi, impaired skin integrity, and urinary incontinence or retention.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2232">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The problems resulting from neurogenic bladder disorders vary considerably from patient to patient and are a major challenge to the health care team. Several long-term objectives appropriate for all types of neurogenic bladders include preventing overdistention of the bladder, emptying the bladder regularly and completely, maintaining urine sterility with no stone formation, and maintaining adequate bladder capacity with no reflux.</p>
<p class="indent">Specific interventions include continuous, intermittent, or self-catheterization (discussed later in this chapter); the use of an external condom-type catheter; a diet low in calcium (to prevent calculi); and encouragement of mobility and ambulation. A liberal fluid intake is encouraged to reduce the urinary bacterial count, reduce stasis, decrease the concentration of calcium in the urine, and minimize the precipitation of urinary crystals and subsequent stone formation.</p>
<p class="indent">A bladder retraining program may be effective in treating a spastic bladder or urine retention. The use of a timed, or habit, voiding schedule may be established. To further enhance emptying of a flaccid bladder, the patient may be taught to &#x201C;double void.&#x201D; After each voiding, the patient is instructed to remain on the toilet, relax for 1 to 2 minutes, and then attempt to void again in an effort to further empty the bladder.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Parasympathomimetic medications, such as bethanechol, may help to increase the contraction of the detrusor muscle.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Surgery may be carried out to correct bladder neck contractures or vesicoureteral reflux, or to perform a urinary diversion procedure.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>