<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2322">Perimenopause</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;perimenopause:&lt;/b&gt; the period around menopause">Perimenopause</button></strong> is the menstrual transition period before menopause that begins on average 4 years before the last menstrual period (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Casper, 2019</a>). Perimenopause is characterized by marked hormonal fluctuations and irregular menstrual cycles (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Casper, 2019</a>). Women often have varied beliefs about aging, and these must be considered when caring for or educating patients who are perimenopausal.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2323">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Women who are perimenopausal often benefit from information about the subtle physiologic changes they are experiencing. Perimenopause has been described as an opportune time for educating women about health promotion and disease prevention strategies. When discussing health-related concerns with women who are in midlife, nurses should consider the following issues:</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Sexuality, fertility, contraception, and STIs</span></li>
<li><span>Unintended pregnancy (if contraception is not used correctly and consistently)</span></li>
<li><span>Oral contraceptive use. Oral contraceptives provide women with protection against uterine cancer, ovarian cancer, anemia, pregnancy, and fibrocystic breast changes as well as relief from perimenopausal symptoms (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). This option should be discussed with women who are perimenopausal. Women who smoke and are 35 years or older should not take oral contraceptive agents because of an increased risk of cerebrovascular disease. Contraception is discussed in detail earlier in this chapter.</span></li>
<li><span>Breast health. About 16% of cases of breast cancer occur in women who are perimenopausal, so breast self-examination, routine physical examinations, and mammograms are essential.</span></li></ul>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>