<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2317">Preconception/Periconception Health Care</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Nurses can be instrumental in encouraging all women of childbearing age, including those with chronic illness or disabilities, to consider issues that may affect health during pregnancy (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3650">Lammers, Hulme, Wey, et al., 2017</a>). Preconception health care is a concept that expands on the definition of prenatal care to include the time before conception <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1669" title="1669"></span>(<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Lammers et al., 2017</a>). Women who plan their pregnancies and are healthy and well informed tend to have better outcomes. There are currently nine consensus recommendations for advancing preconception health (see <a href="#ct50-13">Chart&#x00A0;50-13</a>).</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct50-13"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;50-13</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Preconception Wellness Strategies</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">Nurses can help advance pre- and periconception care of women by establishing the following:</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pregnancy intention</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Absence of sexually transmitted infections</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Access to care</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Healthy weight</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Optimal glycemic control in women with pregestational diabetes</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Preconception multivitamin with folic acid</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Teratogenic medication avoidance</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Tobacco avoidance</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Lammers, C. R., Hulme, P. A., Wey, H., et al. (2017). Understanding women&#x2019;s awareness and access to preconception health care in rural population: A cross-sectional study. <em>Journal of Community Health</em>, <em>42</em>(3), 489&#x2013;499.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Nurses can make a difference in preconception health through education and counseling. Women who use tobacco products, by smoking or ENDS, should be encouraged to stop their use; it may help to offer cessation classes. Women should take folic acid supplements to prevent neural tube defects. Women with diabetes should have good glycemic control prior to conception. It is necessary to assess rubella immunity and other immunizations as well as a family history of genetic defects; genetic counseling may be appropriate. Women taking teratogenic medications and women concerned about genetic disorders should be encouraged to discuss effective contraception and childbearing plans with their primary provider (see <a href="c50-sec03.xhtml#ct50-2">Chart&#x00A0;50-2</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>