<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2284">Menstrual Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Menstrual disorders may include premenstrual syndrome (PMS); dysmenorrhea; amenorrhea; and excessive bleeding, irregular bleeding, or bleeding between cycles or unrelated to cycles. These disorders need to be discussed with a health care provider and managed individually.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2285">Premenstrual Syndrome</h5>
<p class="nonindent">PMS is a cluster of physical, emotional, and behavioral symptoms that are usually related to the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. PMS is very common, affecting many women at some time in their lives (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Gnanasambanthan &#x0026; Datta, 2019</a>) (see <a href="#ct50-7">Chart&#x00A0;50-7</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2286">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Major symptoms of PMS include physical symptoms such as headache, fatigue, low back pain, painful breasts, and a feeling of abdominal fullness. Behavioral and emotional symptoms may include general irritability, mood swings, fear of losing control, binge eating, and crying spells. Symptoms vary widely from one woman to another and from one cycle to the next in the same woman. Great variability is found in the degree of symptoms. Many women are affected to some degree, but some are severely affected. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a severe form of PMS with significant severity of symptoms (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Casper &#x0026; Yonkers, 2019</a>; <a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Gnanasambanthan &#x0026; Datta, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct50-7"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;50-7</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Causes, Manifestations, and Treatment of Premenstrual Syndrome</strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Cause</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Unknown; may be related to hormonal changes combined with other factors (diet, stress, and lack of exercise)</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Many women have some symptoms related to menses, but premenstrual syndrome affects 75% to 95% of women at some point and is a complex of symptoms that result in dysfunction.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Physical Symptoms</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Fluid retention (e.g., bloating, breast tenderness)</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Headache</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Low back pain</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Affective Symptoms</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Depression</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Anger</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Irritability</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Anxiety</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Confusion</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Withdrawal</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Symptoms begin in the 5 days preceding menses, and relief occurs within 4 days of onset of menses. Dysfunction usually occurs in relationships, parenting, work, or school.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Treatment</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The use of social support and family resources</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nutritious diet consisting of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables; increased water intake may help.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Alprazolam has been effective, but risk of physical and psychological dependence is high</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Spironolactone, a diuretic agent, may be effective in treating fluid retention</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Initiation/maintenance of exercise program</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Stress reduction techniques</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Casper, R. F., &#x0026; Yonkers, K. A. (2019). Treatment of premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. <em>UpToDate.</em> Retrieved on 11/17/2019 at: <a href="http://www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-of-premenstrual-syndrome-and-premenstrual-dysphoric-disorder">www.uptodate.com/contents/treatment-of-premenstrual-syndrome-and-premenstrual-dysphoric-disorder</a>; Gnanasambanthan, S., &#x0026; Datta, S. (2019). Premenstrual syndrome. <em>Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine</em>, <em>29</em>(10), 281&#x2013;285.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2287">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because there is no single treatment or known cure for PMS, it is helpful for women to keep a record of their symptoms so they can anticipate and therefore cope with them. Regular exercise may be helpful. Although women have been advised to avoid caffeine, high-fat foods, and refined sugars, little research demonstrates the efficacy of dietary changes. Alternative therapies that have been used include vitamins B<sub>6</sub> (pyridoxine) and E, calcium, magnesium, and oil of primrose capsules (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Casper &#x0026; Yonkers, 2019</a>; <a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Gnanasambanthan &#x0026; Datta, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1656</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1657" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1657">p. 1657</span></div>
<p class="indent">Pharmacologic treatments include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine), prostaglandin inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen and naproxen), diuretic agents, antianxiety agents, and calcium supplements. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone (a synthetic progestin) and extended regimens also may be effective (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Gnanasambanthan &#x0026; Datta, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2288">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nurse obtains a health history, noting the time when symptoms began and their nature and intensity. The nurse then determines whether symptoms occur before or shortly after the menstrual flow begins. In addition, the nurse can show the patient how to record the timing and intensity of symptoms. A nutritional history is also elicited to determine if the diet is high in salt, caffeine, or alcohol or low in essential nutrients.</p>
<p class="indent">The patient&#x2019;s goals may include reduction of anxiety, mood swings, crying, binge eating, fear of losing control, improved coping with day-to-day stressors, improved relationships with family and coworkers, and increased knowledge about PMS. Positive coping measures are promoted. This may involve encouraging the woman&#x2019;s partner to offer support and assistance with childcare. The patient can try to plan her working time to accommodate the days she is less productive because of PMS. The nurse encourages the patient to use exercise, meditation, imagery, and creative activities to reduce stress. The nurse also encourages the patient to take medications as prescribed and provides instructions about the desired effects of the medications. Contact details for PMS support services should also be provided.</p>
<p class="indent">If the patient has severe symptoms of PMS or PMDD, the nurse assesses her for suicidal, uncontrollable, and violent behavior. An immediate psychiatric evaluation is necessary for women with any suggestions of suicidal tendencies. In rare cases, uncontrollable behavior may lead to violence toward family members. If abuse, maltreatment, and neglect of any member of a patient&#x2019;s family are suspected, it is important to implement and follow reporting protocols.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2289">Dysmenorrhea</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Primary dysmenorrhea is painful menstruation, with no identifiable pelvic pathology. It occurs at the time of menarche or shortly thereafter. It is characterized by crampy pain that begins before or shortly after the onset of menstrual flow and continues for 48 to 72 hours. Pelvic examination findings are normal. Dysmenorrhea is thought to result from excessive production of prostaglandins, which causes painful contraction of the uterus. In secondary dysmenorrhea, pelvic pathology such as endometriosis, tumors such as leiomyomata or malignancies, polyps, or pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) contributes to symptoms. Patients frequently have pain that occurs several days before menses, with ovulation, and occasionally with penile-vaginal intercourse. It may be accompanied by nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, and backache (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Kulkarni &#x0026; Deb, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2290">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A pelvic examination is performed to rule out possible disorders, such as endometriosis, PID, adenomyosis, and uterine fibroids. A laparoscopy may be performed to identify organic causes (see <a href="c50-sec04.xhtml#ff50-4">Fig.&#x00A0;50-4</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2291">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In primary dysmenorrhea, the reason for the discomfort is explained, and the patient is assured that menstruation is a normal function of the reproductive system. If the patient is young and accompanied by her mother, the mother may also need reassurance. Many young women expect to have painful periods if their mothers did. The discomfort of cramps can be treated once anxiety and concern about its cause are dispelled by adequate explanation. Symptoms usually subside with appropriate medication. Useful medications include prostaglandin antagonists such as NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen, naproxen, and mefenamic acid, or aspirin). If one medication does not provide relief, another may be recommended. Usually, these medications are well tolerated, but some women experience gastrointestinal side effects. Contraindications include allergy, peptic ulcer history, sensitivity to aspirin-containing medications, asthma, and pregnancy. Low-dose oral contraceptives may be prescribed for women with dysmenorrhea who are sexually active but do not desire pregnancy (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Kulkarni &#x0026; Deb, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Continuous low-level local heat, such as a heating pad, may be effective in relieving primary dysmenorrhea. Heat therapy and medication have been found to work well in combination. The patient is encouraged to continue her usual activities and to increase physical exercise if possible because this relieves discomfort for some women. Taking analgesic agents before cramps start, in anticipation of discomfort, is advised.</p>
<p class="indent">Management of secondary dysmenorrhea is directed at diagnosis of and treatment for the underlying cause (e.g., endometriosis, PID) (see <a href="c51.xhtml">Chapter 51</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2292">Amenorrhea</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;amenorrhea:&lt;/b&gt; absence of menstrual flow">Amenorrhea</button></strong>, or the absence of menstrual flow, is a symptom of a variety of disorders and dysfunctions. Primary amenorrhea (delayed menarche) refers to the situation in which a young woman who by age 15 years has not begun developing secondary sex characteristics or who by age 16 years or older has developed secondary sex characteristics but has not started menstruation (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Welt &#x0026; Barbieri, 2018</a>). There are many reasons for primary amenorrhea, including genetic and anatomical disorders, Turner syndrome, anorexia, and polycystic ovarian syndrome (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Welt &#x0026; Barbieri, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse encourages the patient to express her concerns and anxiety about this problem because the patient may feel that she is different from her peers. A complete physical examination, careful health history, and laboratory tests help rule out possible causes, such as metabolic or endocrine disorders and systemic diseases. Treatment is directed toward correcting any abnormalities.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondary amenorrhea (an absence of menses for three cycles or 6 months after a normal menarche) may be caused by functional hypothalamic amenorrhea, pituitary disease, primary ovarian failure, pregnancy, breast-feeding, menopause, too little body fat (about 22% required for menses), eating disorder, thyroid disease, or polycystic ovary syndrome (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Welt &#x0026; Barbieri, 2018</a>). In adolescents, secondary amenorrhea can <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1658" title="1658"></span>be caused by minor emotional upset related to being away from home, attending college, tension due to schoolwork, or interpersonal problems.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondary nutritional disturbances may also be factors. Obesity can result in anovulation and subsequent amenorrhea. Eating disorders, such as anorexia and bulimia, often result in lack of menses because the decrease in body fat and caloric intake affects hormonal function. Intense exercise can induce menstrual disturbances. Females who are competitive athletes often experience amenorrhea. Oligomenorrhea (infrequent periods) may be related to thyroid disorders, polycystic ovarian syndrome, or premature ovarian failure. Women who are HIV positive are apt to miss menstrual periods and need to be evaluated for pregnancy, thyroid disorders, hyperprolactinemia, and menopause.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2293">Abnormal Uterine Bleeding</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is defined as irregular, painless bleeding of endometrial origin that may be excessive, prolonged, or without pattern. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding can occur at any age but is most common at opposite ends of the reproductive lifespan. It is usually secondary to anovulation (lack of ovulation) and is common in adolescents and women approaching menopause.</p>
<p class="indent">Adolescents account for many cases of abnormal uterine bleeding; they often do not ovulate regularly as the pituitary&#x2013;ovarian axis matures. Women who are perimenopausal also experience this condition because of irregular ovulation secondary to decreasing ovarian hormone production. Other causes may include fibroids, obesity, and hypothalamic dysfunction.</p>
<p class="indent">Abnormal or unusual vaginal bleeding that is atypical in time or amount must be evaluated because it could possibly be a manifestation of a major disorder. A physical examination is performed, and the patient is evaluated for conditions such as pregnancy, neoplasm, infection, anatomic abnormalities, endocrine disorders, trauma, blood dyscrasias, platelet dysfunction, and hypothalamic disorders.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Menorrhagia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Menorrhagia is prolonged or excessive bleeding at the time of the regular menstrual flow. In young women, the cause is usually related to endocrine disturbance; in later life, it usually results from inflammatory disturbances, tumors of the uterus, or hormonal imbalance.</p>
<p class="indent">Women with menorrhagia are urged to see a primary provider and to describe the amount of bleeding by pad count and saturation (i.e., absorbency of perineal pad or tampon and number saturated hourly). Persistent heavy bleeding can result in anemia. It can also be a sign of a bleeding disorder or a result of anticoagulant therapy. Treatment may involve endometrial ablation or hysterectomy.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Metrorrhagia</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Metrorrhagia (vaginal bleeding between regular menstrual periods) is probably the most significant form of menstrual dysfunction because it may signal cancer, benign tumors of the uterus, or other gynecologic problems. This condition warrants prompt evaluation and treatment. Although bleeding between menstrual periods by women taking oral contraceptive agents is usually not serious, irregular bleeding by women taking hormone therapy should be evaluated (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Goodman, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Menometrorrhagia is heavy vaginal bleeding between and during periods. It, too, requires evaluation.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>