<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2263"><strong>CHALLENGES IN WOMEN&#x2019;S HEALTH</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Women face unique challenges in their roles, lifestyles, and family patterns. Furthermore, they encounter increasing environmental hazards and stress, prompting greater attention to health and health-promoting practices. As a result, many women are taking a greater interest in and responsibility for their own health and health care. Nurses encounter women with health care needs in all settings and they need a solid understanding of the unique issues related to women&#x2019;s health to provide optimal care. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) had made major changes to the health insurance market, and millions of women have gained coverage since its implementation (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3647">Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The ACA expands coverage to the uninsured through a combination of Medicaid expansions, private insurance reforms, and tax credits (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3647">Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018</a>). The affordability of health coverage and care is a problem that affects both sexes; however, women consistently are more likely than men to report cost-related barriers to care (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Lee, Monuteaux, &#x0026; Galbraith, 2019</a>). Among the 97.4 million American women ages 19 to 64, most had some form of insurance coverage in 2017. However, gaps in private sector and publicly funded programs still leave almost one in ten women uninsured. Women with low incomes, women of color, and those who are immigrants are still at greater risk of being uninsured. Single mothers are much more likely to be uninsured (13%) than women in two-parent households (10%) (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3647">Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The ACA set new standards for the scope of benefits offered in private plans. In addition to the broad categories of essential health benefits (EHBs) offered by the state-based marketplace plans, the law also requires that new private plans cover preventive services without copayments or other cost sharing. This includes Pap tests, mammograms, bone density tests, as well as the human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccine. New plans are required to cover additional preventive services for women, including prescribed contraceptives, breast-feeding supplies, and resources such as breast pumps, screening for intimate partner violence, well woman visits, and several counseling and screening services (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3647">Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018</a>; <a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Lee et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>