<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2281">Menstruation</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;menstruation:&lt;/b&gt; sloughing and discharge of the lining of the uterus if conception does not take place">Menstruation</button></strong>, the sloughing and discharge of the lining of the uterus that takes place if conception does not occur, happens about every 28 days during the reproductive years, although normal cycles can vary from 25 to 35 days (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3684">Welt, 2019</a>) (see <a href="c50-sec02.xhtml#ff50-3">Fig.&#x00A0;50-3</a>). The flow usually lasts 4 to 5 days, during which time 50 to 60 mL of blood is lost.</p>
<p class="indent">A perineal pad or tampon is generally used to absorb menstrual discharge. Tampons are used extensively. There is no significant evidence of untoward effects from their use, provided that there is no difficulty in inserting them. However, a tampon should not be used for more than 4 to 8 hours, and the lowest absorbency should be used to prevent toxic shock syndrome (<a href="c50-sec15.xhtml#bib3655">Mayo Clinic, 2017</a>). If a tampon is difficult to remove or shreds when removed, less absorbent tampons should be used. If the string breaks or retracts, the woman should squat in a comfortable position, insert one finger into the vagina, try to locate the tampon, and remove it. If she feels uncomfortable attempting this maneuver or cannot remove the tampon, she should consult a gynecologic health care provider promptly.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2282">Psychosocial Considerations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Girls who are approaching <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;menarche:&lt;/b&gt; beginning of menstrual function">menarche</button></strong> (the onset of menstruation) should be educated about the normal process of the menstrual cycle before it occurs. Psychologically, it is much healthier and appropriate to refer to this event as a &#x201C;period&#x201D; rather than as &#x201C;being sick.&#x201D; With adequate nutrition, rest, and exercise, most women feel little discomfort, although some report breast tenderness and a feeling of fullness 1 or 2 days before menstruation begins. Others report fatigue and some <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1656" title="1656"></span>discomfort in the lower back, legs, and pelvis on the first day and temperament or mood changes. Slight deviations from a usual pattern of daily living are considered normal, but excessive deviation may require evaluation. Regular exercise and a healthy diet have been found to decrease discomfort for some women. Heating pads or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be very effective for cramps. For women with excessive cramping or dysmenorrhea, referral to a women&#x2019;s health care provider is appropriate; following evaluation, providers may prescribe oral contraceptive agents.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2283">Cultural Considerations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cultural views and beliefs about menstruation differ. Some women believe that it is detrimental to change a pad or tampon too frequently; they think that allowing the discharge to accumulate increases the flow, which is considered desirable. Some women believe they are vulnerable to illness during menstruation. Others believe it is harmful to swim, shower, have their hair permed, have their teeth filled, or eat certain foods during menstruation. They may also avoid using contraception during menstruation.</p>
<p class="indent">In such situations, nurses are in a position to provide women with facts in an accepting and culturally sensitive manner. The objective is to be mindful of these unexpressed, deep-rooted beliefs and to provide the facts with care. Aspects of gynecologic problems cannot always be expressed easily. The nurse needs to convey confidence and openness and to offer facts to facilitate communication. Suggestions to improve care include overcoming language barriers, providing appropriate materials in the patient&#x2019;s language, asking about traditional beliefs and dietary practices, and asking about fears regarding care. Patience, sensitivity, and a desire to learn about other cultures and groups will enhance the nursing care of all women.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>