<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2371"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1691" title="1691"></span>BENIGN DISORDERS</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2372"><strong>Vulvitis and Vulvodynia</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;vulvitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of the vulva, usually secondary to infection or irritation">Vulvitis</button></strong> (an inflammation of the vulva) may occur with other disorders, such as diabetes, dermatologic problems, or poor hygiene, or it may be secondary to irritation from a vaginal discharge related to a specific vaginitis.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;vulvodynia:&lt;/b&gt; painful condition that affects the vulva">Vulvodynia</button></strong> is a chronic vulvar pain syndrome. Symptoms may include burning, stinging, irritation, or stabbing pain. The syndrome has been described as primary, with onset at first tampon insertion or sexual experience, or secondary, beginning months or years after first tampon insertion or sexual experience. Women affected by this are usually between 18 and 25&#x00A0;years of age. The cause of vulvodynia is not well understood; many believe it is multifactorial. Future research is critical to understanding the pathophysiology and cause of vulvodynia. It can be chronic or unremitting, intermittent or episodic, or may occur only in response to contact (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stenson, 2017</a>). The pathophysiology is unknown. Vestibulodynia is the most frequent type of vulvodynia, producing sharp pain on pressure on the vestibule or posterior aspect of the vaginal opening.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2373">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment methods for vulvodynia vary and depend on cause. Topical treatments, self-management care (strict vulvar care/hygiene), surgery, as well as biofeedback and dietary changes, have been used. Some cases seem to be similar to peripheral neuralgia and may respond to treatment with tricyclic antidepressant agents. Patients with dyspareunia may benefit from referral to a behavioral or mental health professional. Psychotherapy is a validated noninvasive treatment option (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stenson, 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>