<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2331">Candidiasis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Vulvovaginal <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;candidiasis:&lt;/b&gt; fungal infection, usually of skin or mucous membranes, caused by Candida species">candidiasis</button></strong> is a fungal or yeast infection caused by strains of <em>Candida</em> (see <a href="#tt51-1">Table&#x00A0;51-1</a>). It is the second most common type of vaginal infection and accounts for an estimated 1.4 million outpatient visits annually in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2019a). An estimated 75% of women will experience at least one yeast infection, and 40% to 45% will experience two or more in their lifetime (CDC, 2019a). <em>Candida albicans</em> accounts for approximately 90% of the cases, but other strains, such as <em>Candida glabrata,</em> may also be implicated (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3687">Casanova, Chuang, Goepfert, et al., 2019</a>). Many women with a healthy vaginal ecosystem harbor <em>Candida</em> but are asymptomatic. Certain conditions favor the change from an asymptomatic state to colonization with symptoms. For example, the use of antibiotic agents decreases bacteria, thereby altering the natural protective organisms usually present in the vagina. Although infections can occur at any time, they occur more commonly in pregnancy or with a systemic condition such as diabetes or human immune deficiency virus (HIV) infection, or when patients are taking medications such as corticosteroids or oral contraceptive agents (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2332">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Clinical manifestations include a vaginal discharge that causes pruritus (itching) and subsequent irritation. The discharge may be watery or thick but usually has a white, cottage cheese&#x2013;like appearance. Symptoms are usually more severe just before menstruation and may be less responsive to treatment during pregnancy. Diagnosis is made by microscopic identification of spores and <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hyphae:&lt;/b&gt; long, branching filamentous structures characteristic of fungi such as &lt;em&gt;Candida&lt;/em&gt; seen under microscopic examination">hyphae</button></strong> (long, branching filamentous structures) on a glass slide prepared from a discharge specimen mixed with potassium hydroxide. With candidiasis, the pH of the discharge is 4 to 5 (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Manifestations may be uncomplicated, occurring sporadically in women who are healthy, or recurrent and complicated in women who have diabetes, are pregnant, have a compromised immune system, or have obesity.</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt51-1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;51-1</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Vaginal Infections and Vaginitis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Infection</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Cause</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Clinical Manifestations</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Management Strategies</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Candidiasis</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Candida albicans, C. glabrata,</em> or <em>C. tropicalis</em></p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Inflammation of vaginal epithelium, producing itching, reddish irritation</p><p class="tbodyleft">White, cheeselike discharge clinging to epithelium</p></td>
<td class="td1"><p class="tbodyleft">Eradicate the fungus by administering an antifungal agent. Some more frequently used vaginal creams and suppositories are miconazole and clotrimazole.</p><p class="tbodyleft">Review other causative factors (e.g., antibiotic therapy, nylon underwear, tight clothing, pregnancy, oral contraceptive agents).</p><p class="tbodyleft">Assess for diabetes and HIV infection in patients with recurrent monilia.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Gardnerella</em>-associated bacterial vaginosis</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Gardnerella vaginalis</em> and vaginal anaerobes</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Usually no edema or erythema of vulva or vagina</p><p class="tbodyleft">Gray-white to yellow-white discharge clinging to external vulva and vaginal walls</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Administer metronidazole, with instructions about avoiding alcohol while taking this medication.</p><p class="tbodyleft">If infection is recurrent, may treat partner.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Trichomonas vaginalis</em> vaginitis</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Trichomonas vaginalis</em></p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Inflammation of vaginal epithelium, producing burning and itching</p><p class="tbodyleft">Frothy yellow-white or yellow-green vaginal discharge</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Relieve inflammation, restore acidity, and reestablish normal bacterial flora; provide oral metronidazole for patient and partner.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Bartholinitis (infection of the greater vestibular gland)</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft"><em>Escherichia coli</em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>T. vaginalis</em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Staphylococcus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Streptococcus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Gonococcus</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Erythema around vestibular gland</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Swelling and edema</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Abscessed vestibular gland</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Drain the abscess; provide antibiotic therapy; excise gland of patients with chronic bartholinitis.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Cervicitis&#x2014;acute and chronic</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Chlamydia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Gonococcus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Streptococcus</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Many pathogenic bacteria</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Profuse purulent discharge</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Backache</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Urinary frequency and urgency</p></td>
<td class="td1_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Determine the cause&#x2014;perform cytologic examination of cervical smear and appropriate cultures.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Eradicate the gonococcal organism, if present: penicillin (as directed) or spectinomycin or tetracycline, if patient is allergic to penicillin.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Tetracycline, doxycycline to eradicate chlamydia.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Eradicate other causes.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Atrophic vaginitis</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Lack of estrogen; glycogen deficiency</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Discharge and irritation from alkaline pH of vaginal secretions</p></td>
<td class="td2_line"><p class="tbodyleft">Provide topical vaginal estrogen therapy; improve nutrition if necessary; relieve dryness through the use of moisturizing medications.</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">HIV, human immune deficiency virus.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Paladine, H. L., &#x0026; Desai, U. A. (2018). Vaginitis: Diagnosis and treatment. <em>American Family Physician</em>, <em>97</em>(5), 321&#x2013;329.</p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2333">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goal of management is to eliminate symptoms. Treatments include antifungal agents such as miconazole, nystatin, clotrimazole, and terconazole cream. These agents are inserted into the vagina with an applicator at bedtime. There are 1-, 3-, and 7-night treatment courses available (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Paladine &#x0026; Desai, 2018</a>). Oral medication (fluconazole) is also available in a one-pill dose. Relief should be noted within 3 days.</p>
<p class="indent">Some vaginal creams are available without a prescription; however, patients are cautioned to use these creams only if they are certain that they have a yeast or monilial infection. Patients often use these remedies for problems other than yeast infections. If a woman is uncertain about the cause of her symptoms or if relief has not been obtained after using these creams, she should be instructed to seek health care promptly. Yeast infections can become recurrent or complicated. Women may have more than four infections in a year and severe symptoms due to preexisting conditions such as diabetes or immunosuppression. Cell-mediated immunity may be a factor. Women with recurrent yeast infections benefit from a comprehensive gynecologic assessment.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>