<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2409">Cancer of the Ovary</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of gynecologic cancer deaths in the United States, and the fifth deadliest cancer for women following lung, breast, colorectal, and pancreatic (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stewart, Ralyea, &#x0026; Lockwood, 2019</a>). Despite careful physical examination, ovarian tumors are often difficult to detect because they are usually deep in the pelvis. Often called the &#x201C;Silent Killer,&#x201D; about 70% of ovarian cancers are not diagnosed until stage III or IV. Tumor-associated antigens are helpful in determining follow-up care after diagnosis and treatment and to evaluate for recurrent disease but are not useful in early general screening (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2410">Epidemiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">One in 70 women will develop ovarian cancer in her lifetime. The incidence of this type of cancer increases with age until 70 years, with most cases diagnosed by age 60 (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stewart et al., 2019</a>). The frequency of ovarian cancer is highest in industrialized countries and affects women of all races and ethnic backgrounds.</p>
<p class="indent">Family history is the most significant risk factor. Most cases are random, but 8% to 13% of ovarian cancers are familial (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). In most cases, the mutations are in the <em>BRCA1</em> gene and sometimes in the <em>BRCA2</em> gene. A family history in a first-degree relative (mother, daughter, or sister), older age, early menarche, late menopause, and obesity may increase the risk of ovarian cancer. However, most women who develop ovarian cancer have no known risk factors, and no definitive causative factors have been determined.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with concerns about their family history should be referred to a cancer genetics center to obtain information and testing, if indicated (see <a href="c06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>). Women with inherited types of ovarian cancer tend to be younger when the diagnosis is made than the average age at the time of diagnosis. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, also known as Lynch syndrome) increases the risk of ovarian cancer by 5% to 10% (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Lifetime risk <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1701" title="1701"></span>of developing ovarian cancer has been shown to be decreased by 40% to 50% with long-term suppression (greater than 5 years) of ovulation through use of oral contraceptives (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stewart et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2411">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Types of tumors include germ cell tumors, which arise from the cells that produce eggs and are the most common cause of ovarian cancer in women younger than 20 years (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>); stromal cell tumors, which arise in connective tissue cells that produce hormones; and epithelial tumors, which originate from the outer surface of the ovary. Most ovarian cancers are epithelial in origin. Of the many different cell types in ovarian cancer, epithelial tumors constitute 90%. Germ cell and stromal tumors make up the other 10% (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Primary peritoneal carcinoma is closely related to ovarian cancer. Extraovarian primary peritoneal carcinoma (EOPPC) resembles ovarian cancer histologically and can occur in women with and without ovaries. Symptoms and treatment are similar. Because of the possibility of EOPPC, oophorectomy lessens the chance but does not guarantee that the patient will not develop carcinoma.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2412">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms of ovarian cancer are nonspecific and may include increased abdominal girth, pelvic pressure, bloating, back pain, constipation, abdominal pain, urinary urgency, indigestion, flatulence, increased waist size, leg pain, and pelvic pain. Symptoms are often vague, so many women tend to ignore them. Ovarian cancer is often silent, but enlargement of the abdomen from an accumulation of fluid is a common sign. All women with gastrointestinal symptoms without a known cause must be evaluated for potential ovarian cancer. Vague, undiagnosed, persistent gastrointestinal symptoms should alert the nurse to the possibility of an early ovarian malignancy. A palpable ovary in a woman who has gone through menopause is investigated immediately, because ovaries normally become smaller and less palpable after menopause.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2413">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Any enlarged ovary must be investigated. Pelvic examination often does not detect early ovarian cancer, and pelvic imaging techniques are not always definitive. Ovarian tumors are classified as benign if there is no proliferation or invasion, borderline if there is proliferation but no invasion, and malignant if there is invasion. Of all new cases of ovarian tumors, 20% are classified as borderline and have low malignancy potential. However, by the time of diagnosis, most ovarian cancers are advanced (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Stewart et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Diagnostic test may include an MRI scan, transvaginal and pelvic ultrasound, chest x-rays, and a blood test for CA-125. An abdominal CT scan with and without contrast may be used to rule out metastasis (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2414">Medical Management</h5>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Surgical staging, exploration, and reduction of tumor mass are the basics of treatment. Surgical removal is the treatment of choice. Staging the tumor by the FIGO staging system is performed to guide treatment (see <a href="#ct51-8">Chart&#x00A0;51-8</a>). Likely treatment involves a total abdominal hysterectomy with removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries and possibly the omentum (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy), tumor debulking, para-aortic and pelvic lymph node sampling, diaphragmatic biopsies, random peritoneal biopsies, and cytologic washings. Postoperative management may include taxanes or platinum-based chemotherapy (discussed in the next section).</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct51-8"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;51-8</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong>Main Stages of Ovarian Cancer</strong></p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle_1">&#x00A0;&#x00A0;I. Cancer is contained within the ovary (or ovaries).</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle_1">&#x00A0;II. Cancer is in one or both ovaries and has involved other organs (i.e., uterus, fallopian tubes, bladder, the sigmoid colon, or the rectum) within the pelvis.</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle_1">III. Cancer involves one or both ovaries, and one or both of the following are present: (1) cancer has spread beyond the pelvis to the lining of the abdomen; (2) cancer has spread to lymph nodes.</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle_1">IV. The most advanced stage of ovarian cancer. Cancer is in one or both ovaries. There is distant metastasis to the liver, lungs, or other organs outside the peritoneal cavity; ovarian cancer cells in the pleural cavity are evidence of stage IV disease.</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Casanova, R., Chuang, A., Goepfert, A. R., et al. (Eds.). (2019). <em>Beckman and Ling&#x2019;s obstetrics and gynecology</em> (8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Borderline tumors resemble ovarian cancer but have much more favorable outcomes. Women diagnosed with this type of cancer tend to be younger (early 40s). A conservative surgical approach is used. The affected ovary is removed, but the uterus and the contralateral ovary may remain in place. Adjuvant therapy may not be warranted.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Chemotherapy is usually administered IV on an outpatient basis using a combination of platinum and taxane agents. Paclitaxel plus carboplatin are most often used because of their excellent clinical benefits and manageable toxicity. Leukopenia, neurotoxicity, and fever may occur.</p>
<p class="indent">Because paclitaxel often causes leukopenia, patients may need to take granulocyte colony-stimulating factor as well. Paclitaxel is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to medications formulated in polyoxyethylated castor oil and in patients with baseline neutropenia. Because of possible adverse cardiac effects, paclitaxel is not used in patients with cardiac disorders. Hypotension, dyspnea, angioedema, and urticaria indicate severe reactions that usually occur soon after the first and second doses are given. Nurses who administer chemotherapy are prepared to assist in treating anaphylaxis. Patients should be prepared for inevitable hair loss.</p>
<p class="indent">Carboplatin may be used in the initial treatment and in patients with recurrence. It is used with caution in patients with renal impairment. Usually, six cycles are given. A positive clinical response is normalization of the tumor marker CA-125, negative CT results, and a normal physical and gynecologic examination.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1701</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1702" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1702">p. 1702</span></div>
<p class="indent">Liposomal therapy, delivery of chemotherapy in a liposome, allows the highest possible dose of chemotherapy to the tumor target with a reduction in adverse effects. Liposomes are used as drug carriers because they are nontoxic, biodegradable, easily available, and relatively inexpensive. This encapsulated chemotherapy allows increased duration of action and better targeting. The encapsulation of doxorubicin lessens the incidence of nausea, vomiting, and alopecia. Patients must be monitored for bone marrow suppression and gastrointestinal and cardiac effects.</p>
<p class="indent">Combination IV and intraperitoneal chemotherapy is an option for some patients. However, this treatment is more toxic and side effects are more severe than regular chemotherapy (ACS, 2018). Intraperitoneal chemotherapy is reserved for women with good kidney function (ACS, 2018).</p>
<p class="indent">Genetic engineering and identification of cancer genes may make gene therapy a future possibility; gene therapy is under investigation. Emerging proteomic technologies (tissue-based protein analysis) look promising; they may allow earlier diagnosis and treatment decision making. New biomarkers need further validation, but protein signature patterns are now being tested. These technologies may result in individualized treatment strategies for epithelial ovarian cancer (ACS, 2018).</p>
<p class="indent">Recurrence of ovarian cancer is common, and many patients may require treatment with multiple agents. Treatment is directed toward control of the cancer, maintenance of quality of life, and palliation. Liposomal preparations, intraperitoneal drug administration, anticancer vaccines, monoclonal antibodies directed against cancer antigens, gene therapy, and antiangiogenic treatments (to prevent formation of new blood vessels in an effort to halt growth of ovarian cancer) may be used in the treatment for recurrence.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2415">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nursing measures involve those related to the patient&#x2019;s treatment plan, which may include surgery, chemotherapy, palliative care, or a combination of these. Nursing interventions after pelvic surgery to remove the tumor are similar to those after other abdominal surgeries. If ovarian cancer occurs in a young woman and the tumor is unilateral, it is removed. Childbearing, if desired, is encouraged in the near future. After childbirth, surgical re-exploration may be performed, and the remaining ovary may be removed. If both ovaries are involved, bilateral oophorectomy is performed and chemotherapy follows.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with advanced ovarian cancer may develop ascites and pleural effusion. Nursing care may include administering IV fluids prescribed to alleviate fluid and electrolyte imbalances, administering parenteral nutrition to provide adequate nutrition, providing postoperative care after intestinal bypass to alleviate any obstruction, controlling pain, and managing drainage tubes. Comfort measures for women with ascites may include providing small frequent meals, decreasing fluid intake, administering diuretic agents, and providing rest. Patients with pleural effusion may experience shortness of breath, hypoxia, pleuritic chest pain, and cough. Thoracentesis is usually performed to relieve these symptoms. The patient with ovarian cancer often has complex needs and benefits from the assistance and support of an oncology clinical nurse specialist.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>