<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2337">Trichomoniasis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><em>Trichomonas vaginalis</em> is a flagellated protozoan that causes a common STI often called <em>trich.</em> About 3.7 million cases occur each year in the United States; however, only about 30% of those will exhibit symptoms of the disease (CDC, 2017a). Trichomoniasis may be transmitted by an asymptomatic carrier who harbors the organism in the urogenital tract (see <a href="c51-sec02.xhtml#tt51-1">Table&#x00A0;51-1</a>). It may increase the risk of contracting HIV from an infected partner and may play a role in development of cervical neoplasia, postoperative infections, adverse pregnancy outcomes, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and infertility.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2338">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Clinical manifestations include a vaginal discharge that is thin (sometimes frothy), yellow to yellow-green, malodorous, and very irritating. An accompanying vulvitis may result, with vulvovaginal burning and itching. Diagnosis is made most often by microscopic detection of the motile causative organisms or less frequently by culture. Inspection with a speculum often reveals vaginal and cervical erythema (redness) with multiple small petechiae (&#x201C;strawberry spots&#x201D;) (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Testing of a trichomonal discharge demonstrates a pH greater than 4.5.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2339">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most effective treatment for trichomoniasis is metronidazole or tinidazole. All partners receive a one-time loading dose or a smaller dose twice a day for 7 days (CDC, 2015). The one-time dose is more convenient; consequently, adherence tends to be greater. The week-long treatment has occasionally been noted to be more effective. Some patients complain of an unpleasant but transient metallic taste when taking metronidazole. Nausea and vomiting, as well as a hot, flushed feeling can occur when this medication is taken with an alcoholic beverage. Patients are strongly advised to abstain from alcohol during treatment and for 24 hours after taking metronidazole or 72 hours after completion of a course of tinidazole (CDC, 2015). About 1 in 5 people will be reinfected with trichomoniasis within 3 months of treatment. All sexual partners should be treated, and patients are encouraged to abstain from sexual activity for 7 to 10 days after treatment (CDC, 2017a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>