<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2393">MALIGNANT CONDITIONS</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Gynecologic cancer is any cancer that starts in a woman&#x2019;s reproductive organs (CDC, 2019e). According to the American Cancer Society (ACS, 2019a), the projected incidence for female reproductive cancers in the United States includes about 61,880 new cases of uterine cancer; 22,530 new cases of ovarian cancer; 13,170 new cases of cervical cancer; 6070 new cases of vulvar cancer; and 5350 new cases of vaginal cancer per year. Ovarian cancer is responsible for 5% of all cancer deaths in women and is the leading cause of death in female reproductive cancers.</p>
<p class="indent">Although some cancers are difficult to detect or prevent, annual pelvic examination with a Pap smear is a painless and relatively inexpensive method of early detection (CDC, 2019e). Primary providers can encourage women to follow this health practice by providing examinations that are educational and supportive and offer women an opportunity to ask questions and clarify misinformation.</p>
<p class="indent">Women diagnosed with gynecologic malignancies experience anxiety related to their prognosis. The occurrence of physical symptoms may cause more psychological distress. Intervention directed toward physical and psychological symptoms requires a multidisciplinary approach.</p>
<p class="indent">Nurses should be aware of ongoing clinical trials to identify options for many conditions. They are often able to answer questions about clinical trials and to encourage patients to consider participation if appropriate. Women&#x2019;s participation in cancer research may not occur in part because women are unaware of ongoing relevant research (see <a href="http://ClinicalTrials.gov">ClinicalTrials.gov</a> in the Resources section).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>