<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2334">Bacterial Vaginosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Bacterial vaginosis is caused by an overgrowth of anaerobic bacteria and <em>Gardnerella vaginalis</em> normally found in the vagina and an absence of lactobacilli (see <a href="c51-sec02.xhtml#tt51-1">Table&#x00A0;51-1</a>). Risk factors include douching after menses, smoking, multiple sex partners, and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (also referred to as sexually transmitted diseases [STDs]). Bacterial vaginosis is not considered an STI but is associated with sexual activity, and incidence is increased in female same-sex partners (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Paavonen &#x0026; Brunham, 2018</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1678</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1679" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1679">p. 1679</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2335">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bacterial vaginosis can occur throughout the menstrual cycle and does not produce local discomfort or pain. More than half of patients with bacterial vaginosis do not notice any symptoms. Discharge, if noticed, is heavier than normal and gray to yellowish white in color. It is characterized by a fishlike odor that is particularly noticeable after penile&#x2013;vaginal intercourse or during menstruation as a result of an increase in vaginal pH. The pH of the discharge is usually greater than 4.7 because of the amines that result from enzymes from anaerobes. The fishlike odor can be detected readily by adding a drop of potassium hydroxide to a glass slide with a sample of vaginal discharge, which releases amines; this is referred to as a positive &#x201C;whiff&#x201D; test. Under the microscope, vaginal cells are coated with bacteria and are described as &#x201C;clue cells.&#x201D; Lactobacilli, which serve as a natural host defense, are usually absent. Bacterial vaginosis is not usually considered a serious condition, although it can be associated with premature labor, premature rupture of membranes, endometritis, and pelvic infection (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3687">Casanova et&#x00A0;al., 2019</a>; <a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Paavonen &#x0026; Brunham, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2336">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Metronidazole, given orally twice a day for 1 week, is effective; a vaginal gel is also available. Clindamycin vaginal cream or ovules (oval suppositories) are also effective. Treatment of patients&#x2019; partners does not seem to be effective, but the use of condoms may be helpful. Bacterial vaginosis is highly persistent and tends to recur after treatment; therefore, women are encouraged to seek follow-up care if symptoms recur (CDC, 2015; <a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Paladine &#x0026; Desai, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>