<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2384">Endometriosis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Endometriosis is a chronic disease affecting between 7% and 10% of women of reproductive age, occurring more frequently in women who have never had children (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;endometriosis:&lt;/b&gt; endometrial tissue in abnormal locations; causes pain with menstruation, scarring, and possible infertility">Endometriosis</button></strong> consists of a benign lesion or lesions that contain endometrial tissue (similar to that lining the uterus) found in the pelvic cavity outside the uterus. Extensive endometriosis may cause few symptoms, or an isolated lesion may produce severe symptoms. It is a major cause of chronic pelvic pain and infertility.</p>
<p class="indent">Endometriosis has been diagnosed more frequently as a result of the increased use of laparoscopy. There is a high incidence among patients who bear children late and among those who have fewer children. In countries where tradition favors early marriage and early childbearing, endometriosis is rare. There also appears to be a familial predisposition to endometriosis; it is more common in women whose close female relatives are affected. Other factors that may suggest increased risk include a shorter menstrual cycle (less than every 27 days), flow longer than 7 days, outflow obstruction, and younger age at menarche.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2385">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Misplaced endometrial tissue responds to and depends on ovarian hormonal stimulation. During menstruation, this ectopic tissue bleeds, mostly into areas having no outlet, which causes pain and adhesions. The lesions are typically small and puckered, with a blue/brown/gray powder-burn appearance and brown or blue-black appearance, indicating concealed bleeding.</p>
<p class="indent">Endometrial tissue contained within an ovarian cyst has no outlet for the bleeding; this formation is referred to as a pseudocyst or chocolate cyst. Adhesions, cysts, and scar tissue may result, causing pain and infertility (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Endometriosis may increase the risk of ovarian cancer.</p>
<p class="indent">Currently, the best-accepted theory regarding the origin of endometrial lesions is the transplantation theory, which suggests that a backflow of menses (retrograde menstruation) transports endometrial tissue to ectopic sites through the fallopian tubes. Why some women with retrograde menstruation develop endometriosis and others do not is unknown. Endometrial tissue can also be spread by lymphatic or venous channels.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2386">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms vary but include dysmenorrhea (menstrual pain), dyspareunia, and pelvic discomfort or pain. Dyschezia (pain with bowel movements) and radiation of pain to the back or leg may occur. Depression, loss of work due to pain, and relationship difficulties may result. Infertility may occur because of fibrosis and adhesions or because of a variety of substances (prostaglandins, cytokines, other factors) produced by the implants of endometriosis and scar tissue on anatomic sites.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2387">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A health history, including an account of the menstrual pattern, is necessary to elicit specific symptoms. On bimanual pelvic examination, fixed tender nodules are sometimes palpated, and uterine mobility may be limited, indicating adhesions. Laparoscopic examination confirms the diagnosis and helps stage the disease. In stage 1, patients have superficial or minimal lesions; stage 2, mild involvement; stage 3, moderate involvement; and stage 4, extensive involvement and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1694" title="1694"></span>dense adhesions, with obliteration of the cul-de-sac. Ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and CT scans may also be useful to visualize endometriosis (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2388">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment depends on the symptoms, the patient&#x2019;s desire for pregnancy, and the extent of the disease. If the woman does not have symptoms, routine examination may be all that is required. Other therapy for varying degrees of symptoms may be NSAIDs, oral contraceptive agents, GnRH agonists, or surgery. Pregnancy often alleviates symptoms, because neither ovulation nor menstruation occurs.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Palliative measures include the use of medications, such as analgesic agents and prostaglandin inhibitors, for pain. Hormonal therapy is effective in suppressing endometriosis and relieving dysmenorrhea. Oral contraceptive agents provide effective pain relief and may prevent disease progression (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Infrequently, side effects may occur with oral contraceptives, such as fluid retention, weight gain, and nausea. These can usually be managed by changing brands or formulations.</p>
<p class="indent">Several types of hormonal therapy are also available in addition to oral contraceptive agents. A synthetic androgen, danazol, causes atrophy of the endometrium and subsequent amenorrhea. The medication inhibits the release of gonadotropin with minimal overt sex hormone stimulation. The drawbacks of this medication are that it is expensive and may cause troublesome side effects such as fatigue, depression, weight gain, oily skin, decreased breast size, mild acne, hot flashes, and vaginal atrophy (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Comerford &#x0026; Durkin, 2020</a>). GnRH agonists decrease estrogen production and cause subsequent amenorrhea. Side effects are related to low estrogen levels (e.g., hot flashes and vaginal dryness). Loss of bone density is often offset by concurrent use of estrogen. If side effects from GnRH develop, treatment is needed long term or repeated treatments are necessary, additional therapy should be considered. Norethindrone acetate (low-dose hormone) given along with GnRH agonist will mitigate the bone density side effects as well as not affect the drug&#x2019;s control of pelvic pain. Aromatase inhibitor therapy is emerging as an alternative therapy (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Most women continue treatment despite side effects, and symptoms diminish for 80% to 90% of women with mild to moderate endometriosis. Hormonal medications are not used in patients with a history of abnormal vaginal bleeding or liver, heart, or kidney disease. Bone density is followed carefully because of the risk of bone loss; hormone therapy is usually short term.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">If conservative measures are not helpful, surgery may be necessary to relieve pain and improve the possibility of pregnancy. Surgery may be combined with the use of medical therapy. The procedure selected depends on the patient. Laparoscopy may be used to fulgurate (cut with high-frequency current) endometrial implants and to release adhesions. Laser surgery is another option made possible by laparoscopy. Laser therapy vaporizes or coagulates the endometrial implants, thereby destroying this tissue. Other surgical options include endocoagulation and electrocoagulation, laparotomy, abdominal hysterectomy, <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;oophorectomy:&lt;/b&gt; surgical removal of an ovary">oophorectomy</button></strong> (removal of the ovary), bilateral <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;salpingo-oophorectomy:&lt;/b&gt; removal of the ovary and its fallopian tube (removal of the fallopian tube alone is a salpingectomy)">salpingo-oophorectomy</button></strong> (removal of the ovary and its fallopian tube), and appendectomy. Many women need further intervention following conservative surgeries; therefore, total hysterectomy is the definitive procedure (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2389">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The health history and physical examination focus on specific symptoms (e.g., pelvic pain), the effect of prescribed medications, and the woman&#x2019;s reproductive plans. This information helps in determining the treatment plan. Explaining the various diagnostic procedures may help to alleviate the patient&#x2019;s anxiety. Patient goals include relief of pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and avoidance of infertility.</p>
<p class="indent">As the treatment progresses, the woman with endometriosis and her partner may find that pregnancy is not easily possible, and the psychosocial impact of this realization must be recognized and addressed. Alternatives, such as assisted reproductive technologies or adoption, may be discussed at an appropriate time and referrals offered.</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse&#x2019;s role in patient education is to dispel myths and encourage the patient to seek care if dysmenorrhea or dyspareunia occur. The Endometriosis Association (see the Resources section) is a helpful resource for patients seeking further information and support for this condition, which can cause disabling pain and severe emotional distress.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>