<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2359">Human Immune Deficiency Virus Infection and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Any discussion of vulvovaginal infections and STIs must include the topic of HIV and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Although the incidence of HIV diagnosis among women has declined in recent years, more than 7000 (19%) of all new HIV diagnoses are adolescent and adult women (CDC, 2019c). Because HIV infection may be detected during prenatal testing and screening for STIs, nurses and other women&#x2019;s health care clinicians may be the first professionals to provide care for a woman with HIV infection. Thus, clinicians need to be knowledgeable about this disorder and sensitive to women&#x2019;s issues and concerns.</p>
<p class="indent">After informed consent is obtained, women who are at risk for HIV are offered testing by a nurse or counselor. Because patients may be reluctant to discuss risk-taking behavior, routine screening should be offered to all women between the ages of 13 and 64 years in all health care settings (CDC, 2019d). Early detection permits early treatment to delay progression of the disease. The nurse needs to remember that many women do not see themselves as at risk for acquiring HIV infection. See <a href="c32.xhtml">Chapter 32</a> for further discussion of HIV infection and AIDS.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>