<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2406">Cancer of the Vagina</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Cancer of the vagina is uncommon, representing 1% to 3% of gynecologic cancers; it is usually squamous in origin (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>). Malignant melanoma and sarcomas can occur. Most vaginal cancers are secondary and invasive at the time of diagnosis. Risk factors include previous cervical cancer, in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol, previous vaginal or vulvar cancer, previous radiation therapy, history of HPV, or pessary use. Any patient with previous cervical cancer should be examined regularly for vaginal lesions.</p>
<p class="indent">Vaginal pessaries, which are used to support prolapsed tissues, can be a source of chronic irritation. As such, they have been associated with vaginal cancer, but only when the devices were not cared for properly (i.e., the device was not cleaned regularly or the patient did not return to the primary provider regularly for vaginal examinations).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients often do not have symptoms but may report slight bleeding after penile&#x2013;vaginal intercourse, spontaneous bleeding, vaginal discharge, pain, and urinary or rectal symptoms (or both). Diagnosis is often by Pap smear. Encouraging close follow-up is the focus of nursing interventions with women who were exposed to diethylstilbestrol in utero. Emotional support for mothers who received diethylstilbestrol before its risks were discovered and their daughters who were exposed to diethylstilbestrol in utero is essential.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2407">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment of early lesions may include local excision, topical chemotherapy, or laser. Laser therapy is a common treatment option in early vaginal and vulvar cancer. Surgery for more advanced lesions depends on the size and the stage of the cancer. If radical vaginectomy is required, a vagina can be reconstructed with tissue from the intestine, muscle, or skin grafts. After vaginal reconstructive surgery and radiation, regular penile&#x2013;vaginal intercourse may be helpful in preventing vaginal stenosis. Water-soluble lubricants are helpful in reducing dyspareunia.</p>
<p class="indent">Following surgery, radiation therapy may be given by a variety of methods, including external-beam radiation, which is usually an outpatient procedure, or brachytherapy, which is internal radiation therapy. Internal radiation may be given with intracavitary radioactive material contained in a seed, wire, needle, or tube, which is placed into a cavity such as the uterus or vagina. Interstitial radiation is another type of internal radiation treatment in which the radioactive material is placed in or near the cancer but not into a body cavity and is used in cervical and ovarian malignancies. These treatments may be high dose for a short period or low dose, which may take longer. Treatment during hospitalization or during outpatient therapy depends on several factors, including the status of the patient and the mode of delivery.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>