<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2374">Vulvar Cysts</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;Bartholin cyst:&lt;/b&gt; a cyst in a paired Bartholin or vestibular gland in the vulva">Bartholin cyst</button></strong> results from the obstruction of a duct in one of the paired Bartholin or vestibular mucous-secreting glands located in the posterior third of the vulva, near the vestibule. This cyst is the most common vulvar disorder. A simple cyst may be asymptomatic, but an infected cyst or abscess may cause discomfort. Infection may be due to a gonococcal organism, <em>Escherichia coli,</em> or <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> and can cause an abscess with or without involving the inguinal lymph nodes. Skene duct cysts may result in pressure, dyspareunia, altered urinary stream, and pain, especially if infection is present. Vestibular cysts, located inferior to the hymen, may also occur. Cysts can be treated by resection or with laser, ablation with silver nitrate, and puncture. Asymptomatic cysts do not require treatment. Malignancy can occur, usually in women older than 40 years, so drainage and biopsy may be considered (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Mahonski &#x0026; Hu, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2375">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The usual treatment for a symptomatic Bartholin cyst or abscess is drainage. If a cyst is asymptomatic, treatment is unnecessary. Moist heat or sitz baths may promote drainage and resolution.</p>
<p class="indent">If drainage is necessary, several techniques are available. The simplest technique is incision and drainage. Using a Word catheter provides another method. This catheter, which is a short latex stem with an inflatable bulb at the distal end, creates a tract that preserves the gland and allows for drainage. A nonopioid analgesic agent may be given before this outpatient procedure. A local anesthetic agent is injected, and the cyst is incised or lanced and irrigated with normal saline; the catheter is inserted and inflated with 2 to 3 mL of water. The catheter stem is then tucked into the vagina to allow freedom of movement. The catheter is left in place for 4 to 6 weeks (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Mahonski &#x0026; Hu, 2019</a>). The patient is informed that discharge should be expected because the catheter allows drainage of the cyst. She is instructed to contact her primary provider if pain occurs, in which case the bulb may be too large for the cavity and fluid may need to be removed. Routine hygiene is encouraged. Marsupialization (creation of small pouch) and gland removal are additional treatment options (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Mahonski &#x0026; Hu, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>