<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2379">Ovarian Cysts</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The ovary is a common site for cysts, which may be simple enlargements of normal ovarian constituents, the graafian follicle, or the corpus luteum, or they may arise from abnormal growth of the ovarian epithelium. Ovarian cysts are often detected on routine pelvic examination. Although these cysts are typically benign, they nevertheless should be evaluated to exclude ovarian cancer, particularly in women who are postmenopausal (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Casanova et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient may or may not report acute or chronic abdominal pain. Symptoms of a ruptured cyst mimic various acute abdominal emergencies, such as appendicitis or ectopic pregnancy. Larger cysts may produce abdominal swelling and exert pressure on adjacent abdominal organs.</p>
<p class="indent">Postoperative nursing care after surgery to remove an ovarian cyst is similar to that after abdominal surgery, with one exception. The marked decrease in intra-abdominal pressure resulting from removal of a very large cyst usually leads to considerable abdominal distention. This may be prevented to some extent by applying a snug-fitting abdominal binder.</p>
<p class="indent">Some surgeons discuss the option of a hysterectomy when a woman is undergoing bilateral ovary removal because of a suspicious mass; it may increase life expectancy and avoid a later second surgery. Patient preference is a priority in determining its appropriateness.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong>Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)</strong> is a type of hormonal imbalance or cystic disorder that affects the ovaries. This complex endocrine condition involves a disorder in the hypothalamic-pituitary and ovarian network or axis, resulting in chronic anovulation and hyperandrogenism, often along with multiple small ovarian cysts. It is common and occurs in approximately 6% to 20% of women of childbearing age (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Pfieffer, 2019</a>). Features can include obesity, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, sleep apnea, and infertility. Symptoms are related to androgen excess. Irregular menstrual periods, resulting from lack of regular ovulation, infertility, obesity, and hirsutism, may be a presenting complaint. Cysts form in the ovaries because the hormonal milieu cannot cause ovulation on a regular basis.</p>
<p class="indent">Diagnosis is based on clinical criteria, including hyperandrogenism, chronic anovulation, and polycystic ovaries on ultrasound examination. Two out of three of these criteria must be present to make the diagnosis (ACOG, 2018b; Pfieffer, 2019). Women with PCOS are at increased risk for diabetes, increased blood lipids, cardiovascular disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease as well as anxiety and depression (<a href="c51-sec31.xhtml#bib3753">Pfieffer, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1692</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1693" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1693">p. 1693</span></div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2380">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome consists of lifestyle changes including weight loss and pharmacotherapy. Oral contraceptive agents are often prescribed to treat PCOS (ACOG, 2018b; Pfieffer, 2019). When pregnancy is desired, medications to stimulate ovulation (clomiphene citrate) are often effective. Lifestyle modification is critical, and weight management is part of the treatment plan.</p>
<p class="indent">Weight loss as little as 5% to 10% of total body weight can help with hormone imbalance and infertility. Metformin often regulates periods and can help with weight loss (ACOG, 2018b; Pfieffer, 2019). Women with this diagnosis are at increased risk for endometrial cancer due to anovulation.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>