<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2422">BREAST ASSESSMENT</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2423"><strong>Anatomic and Physiologic Overview</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Male and female breasts mature comparably until puberty, when estrogen and other hormones initiate breast development in females. This development usually occurs from 10&#x00A0;to 16 years of age, although the range can vary from 9 to 18&#x00A0;years. Stages of breast development are described as Tanner stages 1 through 5:</p>
<p class="BL1First0"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Stage 1 describes a prepuberty breast.</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Stage 2 is breast budding, the first sign of puberty in a female.</span></li>
<li><span>Stage 3 involves further enlargement of breast tissue and the areola (a darker tissue ring around the nipple).</span></li>
<li><span>Stage 4 occurs when the nipple and areola form a secondary mound on top of the breast tissue.</span></li>
<li><span>Stage 5 is the continued development of a larger breast with a single contour.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">The breasts are located between the second and sixth ribs over the pectoralis muscle from the sternum to the midaxillary line. An area of breast tissue, called the <em>tail of Spence,</em> extends into the axilla (<a href="c52-sec26.xhtml#bib3819">Bland, Copeland, &#x0026; Klimberg, 2018</a>). Fascial bands, called <em>Cooper ligaments,</em> support the breast on the chest wall. The inframammary fold (or crease) is a ridge of fat at the bottom of the breast.</p>
<p class="indent">Each breast contains 12 to 20 cone-shaped lobes, which are made up of glandular elements (lobules and ducts) and separated by fat and fibrous tissue that binds the lobes together. Milk is produced in the lobules and then carried through the ducts to the nipple. <a href="c52-sec02.xhtml#ff52-1">Figure 52-1</a> shows the anatomy of the fully developed breast.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>