<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2488">Augmentation Mammoplasty</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Augmentation mammoplasty is requested by women who desire larger or fuller breasts. The procedure is performed by placing a breast implant either under the pectoralis muscle (subpectoral) or under the breast tissue (subglandular). The subpectoral approach is preferred because it interferes less with clinical breast examinations and mammograms. The incision line can be placed in the inframammary fold, in the axilla, or around the areola. The procedure is performed as an outpatient procedure under general anesthesia. A drain is not necessary. Postoperative instructions are the same as for reduction mammoplasty.</p>
<p class="indent">Saline implants are typically used for augmentation mammoplasty. The FDA has approved the use of silicone gel&#x2013;filled implants manufactured by three companies. FDA approval for use of these implants applies to women of all ages for breast reconstruction, and women 22 years and older for breast augmentation (FDA, 2019). Women with breast implants should be aware that mammograms may be more difficult to read, so they should seek experienced breast radiologists.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>