<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2449">Other Benign Conditions</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Cystosarcoma phyllodes is a rare fibroepithelial tumor that tends to grow rapidly. It is rarely malignant and is treated with surgical excision. If it is malignant, mastectomy may follow. Lymph node removal is usually not performed, because metastasis is rare.</p>
<p class="indent">Fat necrosis is a condition of the breast that is often associated with a history of trauma. Surgical procedures such as a breast biopsy, lumpectomy, or mastectomy can cause fat necrosis. It may be indistinguishable from carcinoma, and the entire mass may be excised or biopsied. If excision is not indicated, it is followed with regular breast imaging.</p>
<p class="indent">Intraductal papilloma is a wartlike growth that often involves the large milk ducts near the nipple, causing bloody nipple discharge. Surgery usually involves removal of the papilloma and a segment of the duct where the papilloma is found.</p>
<p class="indent">Superficial thrombophlebitis of the breast (Mondor disease) is an uncommon condition that is usually associated with pregnancy, trauma, or breast surgery. Pain and redness occur as a result of a superficial thrombophlebitis in the vein that drains the outer part of the breast. The mass is usually linear, tender, and erythematous. Treatment consists of analgesic agents and heat.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>