<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2446">Benign Proliferative Breast Disease</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The two most common types of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;benign proliferative breast disease:&lt;/b&gt; various types of atypical, yet noncancerous, breast tissue that increase the risk of breast cancer">benign proliferative breast disease</button></strong> (atypical, yet noncancerous, breast tissue) found on biopsy are atypical hyperplasia and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). These diagnoses increase a woman&#x2019;s risk of breast cancer.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2447">Atypical Hyperplasia</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;atypical hyperplasia:&lt;/b&gt; abnormal increase in the number of cells in a specific area within the ductal or lobular areas of the breast; this abnormal proliferation increases the risk for cancer">Atypical hyperplasia</button></strong> can be ductal or lobular and is a premalignant lesion of the breast. It is recognized as a precursor lesion to both noninvasive and invasive breast cancer. Imbalance in the normal regulation of cell proliferation is a defining feature. Women with atypical hyperplasia have a fourfold increased risk of breast cancer compared to women in the general population (<a href="c52-sec26.xhtml#bib3819">Sasaki et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2448">Lobular Carcinoma In Situ</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong>Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)</strong> is an incidental microscopic finding of abnormal tissue growth in the lobules of the breast. Many types of LCIS have been identified; some types are associated with a 4- to 10-fold increased risk of invasive breast cancer (<a href="c52-sec26.xhtml#bib3819">Klimberg &#x0026; Bland, 2018</a>). Affected women should undergo rigorous breast cancer surveillance that consists of annual mammography and clinical breast examination every 6 months (NCCN, 2019). Patients should be offered information about chemoprevention with selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), such as tamoxifen. See the discussion of chemoprevention later in this chapter.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>