<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2464">Radiation Therapy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Radiation therapy is used to decrease the chance of a local recurrence in the breast by eradicating residual microscopic cancer cells. Breast conservation treatment followed by radiation therapy for stages I and II breast cancer results in a survival rate equal to that of a mastectomy (Freedman, 2018a). If radiation therapy, which is part of breast conservation treatment (see <span class="chart"><a href="#ct52-9">Chart&#x00A0;52-9</a></span>), is contraindicated, a mastectomy would then be indicated.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct52-9"><strong>Chart&#x00A0;52-9</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong><strong><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1731" title="1731"></span>Contraindications to Breast Conservation Treatment</strong></strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA"><em>Note:</em> Breast-conservation treatment includes both surgery and radiation.</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Absolute Contraindications</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>First or second trimester of pregnancy</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Prior radiation to the breast or chest region</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Patient preference for mastectomy</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Relative Contraindications</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>History of collagen vascular disease</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Large tumor-to-breast ratio</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>High probability of recurrence</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>High probability of problems with radiation therapy</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Two or more tumors in different quadrants of the breast</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Rivere, A., &#x0026; Klimberg, V. (2018). Lymphedema in the postmastectomy patient: Pathophysiology, prevention, and management. In K. Bland, E. Copeland, V. Klimberg, et al. (Eds.). <em>The breast: comprehensive management of benign and malignant diseases</em> (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">External-beam radiation (the most common type) typically begins about 6 weeks after breast conservation to allow the surgical site to heal. If systemic chemotherapy is indicated, radiation therapy usually begins after its completion. Before radiation begins, the patient undergoes a planning session called a <em>simulation,</em> in which the anatomic areas to be treated are mapped out and then identified with small permanent ink markings (National Cancer Institute, 2018b). External-beam radiation, which delivers high-energy photons from a linear accelerator, is given to the entire breast region (whole breast radiation). Each treatment lasts only a few minutes and is generally given 5 days a week for 5 to 6 weeks. After completion of radiation to the entire breast, many patients receive a &#x201C;boost&#x201D;&#x2014;a dose of radiation to the lumpectomy site where the cancer cells were located. The boost consists of the same dose of radiation but is less penetrating and directed to a smaller area. The treatments are not painful.</p>
<p class="indent">Because most breast cancer recurrences appear at or near the lumpectomy site, the need for whole breast radiation has been questioned. Partial breast radiation (radiation to the lumpectomy site alone) continues be evaluated at some institutions in patients who have been carefully selected. One approach is <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;brachytherapy:&lt;/b&gt; delivery of radiation therapy through internal implants placed inside or adjacent to the tumor">brachytherapy</button></strong>, in which radiation is delivered by an internal device that is placed inside or adjacent to the tumor within the breast. This technique can lead to an improved quality of life because the treatments are given over 4 to 5 days instead of 5 to 6 weeks. After mastectomy, postoperative radiation may be indicated for women at high risk for cancer recurrence (i.e., chest wall involvement, four or more positive lymph nodes, tumors larger than 5 cm, positive surgical margins).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2465">Side Effects</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In general, radiation therapy is well tolerated. Acute side effects consist of mild to moderate erythema, breast edema, and fatigue. Occasionally, skin breakdown may occur in the inframammary fold or near the axilla toward the end of treatment; breakdown may be managed by application of topical medications between treatments (Freedman, 2018b). Fatigue can be depressing, as can the frequent trips to the radiation oncology unit for treatment. The patient needs to be reassured that the fatigue is normal and not a sign of recurrence. Side effects usually resolve within a few weeks to a few months after treatment is completed. Some long-term effects of radiation therapy include lung disease, dental disease, osteoporosis, and heart and vascular disease (Pedersen &#x0026; Klemp, 2018).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2466">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nurses play a significant role in supporting patients throughout their treatment with radiation therapy. During brachytherapy, the radiation source will give off radiation. Patients must be educated about safety measures, including any restrictions to visitors, especially young children and pregnant women (National Cancer Institute, 2018a). See <a href="c12.xhtml">Chapter 12</a> for discussion of radiation therapy.</p>
<p class="indent">Self-care instructions for patients receiving radiation are provided to assist in the maintenance of skin integrity during the treatments and for several weeks after completion. They pertain only to the area being treated and not to the rest of the body. Instructions from the National Cancer Institute (2018c) include:</p>
<p class="BL1First0"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Use mild soap with minimal rubbing.</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Avoid perfumed soaps or deodorants.</span></li>
<li><span>Use hydrophilic lotions for dryness.</span></li>
<li><span>Use a nondrying, antipruritic soap if pruritus occurs.</span></li>
<li><span>Avoid tight clothes, underwire bras, excessive temperatures, and ultraviolet light.</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">Follow-up care includes educating the patient to minimize sun exposure to the treated area (i.e., using sunblock with sun protection factor [SPF] of 15 or higher) and reassuring the patient that short-term minor twinges and pain in the breast are normal after radiation treatment.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>