<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2435">CONDITIONS AFFECTING THE NIPPLE</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2436"><strong>Nipple Discharge</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Nipple discharge in a woman who is not lactating may be related to many causes, such as carcinoma, papilloma, pituitary adenoma, cystic breasts, and various medications. Oral contraceptives, pregnancy, HT, chlorpromazine, and frequent breast stimulation may be contributing factors. In some women, nipple discharge may occur during running or aerobic exercises. Nipple discharge should be evaluated by a health care provider, but it is not often a cause for alarm. One in three women has clear discharge on expression, which is usually normal. A green discharge could indicate an infection. Any discharge that is spontaneous, persistent, or unilateral is of concern. Although bloody discharge can indicate a malignancy, it is often caused by a benign wartlike growth on the lining of the duct called an <em>intraductal papilloma.</em></p>
<p class="indent">Nipple discharge should be evaluated for the presence of occult (hidden) blood by performing a guaiac test. A negative test can be reassuring as it indicates that there is no blood, but it does not prove there is no malignancy. A galactogram can also be performed to detect abnormalities within the duct that may be causing the discharge. If there is a high level of suspicion, an excisional biopsy may be indicated. (See procedures for tissue analysis earlier in this chapter.)</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>