<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2438">BREAST INFECTIONS</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2439"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;mastitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation or infection of the breast">Mastitis</button></strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;mastitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation or infection of the breast">Mastitis</button></strong>, an inflammation or infection of breast tissue, occurs most commonly in women who are breast-feeding, although it may also occur in women who are nonlactating. The infection may result from a transfer of microorganisms to the breast by the patient&#x2019;s hands or from a breast-fed infant with an oral, eye, or skin infection. Mastitis may also be caused by bloodborne organisms. As inflammation progresses, the breast texture becomes tough or doughy, and the patient complains of dull to severe pain in the infected region. A nipple that is discharging purulent material, serum, or blood should be investigated promptly.</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment consists of antibiotics and local application of cold compresses to relieve discomfort. A broad-spectrum antibiotic agent may be prescribed for 7 to 10 days. The patient should wear a snug bra and perform personal hygiene carefully. Adequate rest and hydration are important aspects of management.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2440">Lactational Abscess</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A breast abscess may develop as a consequence of acute mastitis. The area affected becomes tender and red. Purulent <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1718" title="1718"></span>matter can usually be aspirated with a needle, but incision and drainage may be required. Specimens of the aspirated material are obtained for culture so that an organism-specific antibiotic agent can be prescribed.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>