<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2528">DISORDERS AFFECTING THE TESTES AND ADJACENT STRUCTURES</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2529"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;orchitis:&lt;/b&gt; acute inflammation of the testes (testicular congestion) caused by pyogenic, viral, spirochetal, parasitic, traumatic, chemical, or unknown factors">Orchitis</button></strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;orchitis:&lt;/b&gt; acute inflammation of the testes (testicular congestion) caused by pyogenic, viral, spirochetal, parasitic, traumatic, chemical, or unknown factors">Orchitis</button></strong> is an acute inflammation of one or both testes as a complication of systemic infection or as an extension of an associated epididymitis caused by bacterial, viral, spirochetal, or parasitic organisms. Microorganisms may reach the testes <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1770" title="1770"></span>through the blood, lymphatic system, or, more commonly, by traveling through the urethra, vas deferens, and epididymis; bacteria usually spread from an associated epididymitis in sexually active men. The majority of cases are caused by viral mumps but other causative organisms include <em>Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, E. coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus</em> species, and <em>Streptococcus</em> species (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Signs and symptoms of orchitis include fever; pain, which may range from mild to severe; tenderness in one or both testicles; bilateral or unilateral testicular swelling; penile discharge; blood in the semen; and leukocytosis.</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment of orchitis is based on whether the causative organism is bacterial or viral. Bacterial orchitis is treated with antibiotic agents and supportive comfort measures. If the cause of the orchitis is an STI, the partner should be treated as well. Viral orchitis is treated using supportive treatments of rest, elevation of the scrotum, ice packs to reduce scrotal edema, analgesic agents, and anti-inflammatory medications. Bilateral orchitis can cause sterility in some men. Mumps vaccination is recommended for men who have not had mumps or received inadequate immunization in childhood. Orchitis develops in approximately 30% of males who are post puberty with mumps 4 to 6 days after parotitis starts, and one third of men have irreversible loss of spermatogenesis (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>