<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2510">INFECTIONS OF THE MALE GENITOURINARY TRACT</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Acute uncomplicated cystitis in adult men is uncommon but occasionally occurs. Asymptomatic bacteriuria may also result from genitourinary manipulation, catheterization, or instrumentation. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are discussed in <a href="c49.xhtml">Chapter 49</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2019), more than 20 million people develop sexually transmitted infections (STIs) annually in the United States; almost half of all STIs occur in people 15 to 24 years of age. The CDC (2019) also reported that the incidence of STIs has increased over the past several years from 2013 through 2017, except in specific populations, such as men who have sex with men. Routine human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination for all males has become the standard of preventative care since 2011, as recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3871">Meites, Szilagyi, Chesson, et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">STIs affect people from all walks of life&#x2014;from all social, educational, economic, and racial backgrounds. The single greatest risk factor for contracting an STI is the number of sexual partners. As the number of partners increases, so does the risk of exposure to a person infected with an STI. For men who have sex with men, the CDC recommends annual testing for human immune deficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, <em>Chlamydia,</em> gonorrhea, hepatitis B viral infection, and herpes simplex virus type 2, along with counseling (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">An, Bernstein, &#x0026; Balaji, 2020</a>; CDC, 2019). Additionally, it is now encouraged that primary providers screen for STI at extragenital sites such as the oropharyngeal and anal areas (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Keenan, Thomas, &#x0026; Cotler, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">There are many causes of urethritis (gonococcal and nongonococcal), genital ulcers (genital herpes infections, primary syphilis, chancroid, granuloma inguinale, and lymphogranuloma venereum), genital warts (HPV), scabies, pediculosis pubis, molluscum contagiosum, hepatitis and enteric infections, proctitis, and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Trichomoniasis and STIs characterized by genital ulcers are thought to increase susceptibility to HIV infection. Trichomoniasis is associated with nonchlamydial, nongonococcal urethritis.</p>
<p class="indent">Current treatment guidelines for STIs are available from the CDC (2019; Kuehn, 2019). Treatment must target the patient as well as his sexual partners and sometimes an unborn child. A thorough history, including a sexual history, is crucial to identify patients at risk and to direct care and education. It is essential for patient education to focus on partner safety as people can misjudge partner safety with known acquaintances, thus causing individuals to be at greater risk of STI/HIV transmission (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Dennin &#x0026; Sinn, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Partners of men with STIs must also be examined, treated, and counseled to prevent reinfection and complications in both partners and to limit the spread of the disease. Sexual abstinence during treatment and recovery is advised to prevent the transmission of STIs. The use of synthetic condoms for at least 6 months after completion of treatment is recommended to decrease transmission of HPV infection as well as other STIs. It is important to assess and test for other STIs because patients who have one STI may also have another. The use of spermicides with nonoxynol-9 (known as N-9) is discouraged; these agents do not protect against HIV infection and may increase the risk of transmission of the virus. See <a href="c32.xhtml">Chapters&#x00A0;32</a> and <a href="c66.xhtml">66</a> for more detailed discussions of HIV infection, AIDS, and other STIs.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>