<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2557">Priapism</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Priapism, a relatively uncommon disorder, is defined as a persistent penile erection that may or may not be related to sexual stimulation. The penis becomes large, hard, and painful. Priapism results from either neural or vascular causes, including sickle cell disease, leukemic cell infiltration, polycythemia, spinal cord tumors or injury, and tumor invasion of the penis or its vessels. It may also occur with use of vasoactive agents that affect the central nervous system, antihypertensive agents, antipsychotic and antidepressant medications, substances injected into the penis to treat erectile dysfunction, alcohol, and cocaine. There are three forms of priapism: ischemic (venoocclusive; low flow), nonischemic (high flow), and stuttering (intermittent).</p>
<p class="indent">The ischemic form, which is described as nonsexual, persistent erection with little or no cavernous blood flow, must be treated promptly to prevent permanent damage to the penis. The goal of therapy is to improve venous drainage of the corpora cavernosa to prevent ischemia, fibrosis, and erectile dysfunction. The initial treatment is directed at relieving the erection, preventing penile damage, and simultaneously treating the underlying disease. Recommended <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1777" title="1777"></span>treatment is aspiration of the corpora cavernosa (with or without irrigation) or injection of sympathomimetic agents (e.g., phenylephrine). Repeated injections may be needed to resolve priapism. Surgical shunts are used to reestablish penile circulation if repeated injections of the sympathomimetic are ineffective (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Goonewardene et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Nonischemic priapism and stuttering are generally not considered emergencies and often resolve without treatment. Conservative treatment (e.g., application of ice and site-specific compression to the injury) may be used. If repeated episodes occur, surgical shunting is considered. Patients with the intermittent form of priapism may be instructed in intracavernosal self-injection of phenylephrine.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>