<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2550">DISORDERS AFFECTING THE PENIS</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2551"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;phimosis:&lt;/b&gt; condition in which the foreskin is constricted so that it cannot be retracted over the glans; can occur congenitally or from inflammation and edema">Phimosis</button></strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;phimosis:&lt;/b&gt; condition in which the foreskin is constricted so that it cannot be retracted over the glans; can occur congenitally or from inflammation and edema">Phimosis</button></strong> is a condition in which the prepuce (foreskin) cannot be retracted over the glans in uncircumcised males. With the decrease in routine circumcision of newborns, early education should be given to parents about cleansing the foreskin and the need for retraction to cleanse the glans. If the glans is not cleaned, secretions accumulate, causing balanitis (inflammation of the glans penis), which can later lead to adhesions and fibrosis. Phimosis often develops in adults as a result of inflammation, edema, and constriction because of poor hygiene or underlying medical conditions such as diabetes. The thickened secretions, called smegma, can become encrusted with urinary salts and calcify, forming calculi in the prepuce and increasing the risk of penile carcinoma. Treatment for phimosis secondary to inflammation is the application of steroidal cream to the foreskin to soften and correct the narrowness, resulting in decreased constriction. Although phimosis is the most common indication for adult circumcision, it is rarely necessary to surgically correct the condition by loosening or removing the foreskin.</p>
<p class="indent">Paraphimosis is a condition in which the foreskin, once retracted over the glans, cannot be returned to its usual position. Chronic inflammation under the foreskin leads to formation of a tight ring of skin when the foreskin is retracted behind the glans, causing venous congestion, edema, and enlargement of the glans, which makes the condition worse. As the condition progresses, arterial occlusion and necrosis of the glans may occur. Paraphimosis usually can be treated by firmly compressing the glans for 5 minutes to reduce the tissue edema and size and then pushing the glans back while simultaneously moving the foreskin forward (manual reduction). The constricting skin ring may require incision under local anesthesia. Circumcision is usually indicated after the inflammation and edema subside (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>