<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2530">Epididymitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;epididymitis:&lt;/b&gt; infection of the epididymis that usually descends from an infected prostate or urinary tract; also may develop as a complication of gonorrhea, chlamydia, or &lt;em&gt;Escherichia coli&lt;/em&gt;">Epididymitis</button></strong> is an infection of the epididymis, which usually spreads from an infected urethra, bladder, or prostate. The incidence is less than 1 in 1000 males per year. Prevalence is greatest in men 19 to 35 years of age. Acute epididymitis occurs bilaterally in 5% to 10% of affected patients (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>). Risk factors for epididymitis include recent surgery or a procedure involving the urinary tract, participation in high-risk sexual practices, personal history of an STI, past prostate infections or UTIs, lack of circumcision, history of an enlarged prostate, and the presence of a chronic indwelling urinary catheter.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2531">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A causative organism can be identified in 80% of patients. In prepubertal males, older men, and gay men, the predominate causal organism is <em>E. coli</em>; although in older men, the condition may also be a result of urinary obstruction. In sexually active men 35 years and younger, the pathogens usually are related to bacteria associated with STIs (e.g., <em>C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae</em>). The infection moves in an upward direction, through the urethra and the ejaculatory duct, and then along the vas deferens to the epididymis (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Teelin, Babu, &#x0026; Urban, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2532">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Epididymitis often slowly develops over 1 to 2 days, beginning with a low-grade fever, chills, and heaviness in the affected testicle. The testicle becomes increasingly tender to pressure and traction. The patient may report unilateral pain, soreness in the inguinal canal along the course of the vas deferens, and pain and swelling in the scrotum and the groin. The epididymis becomes increasingly swollen, with extreme pain in the lower abdomen and pelvis. Occasionally, there may be discharge from the urethra, blood in the semen, pyuria and bacteriuria (pus and bacteria in the urine), and pain during sexual activity and ejaculation. The patient may report urinary frequency, urgency, or dysuria, and testicular pain aggravated by bowel movement.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2533">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Laboratory assessment includes urinalysis, complete blood cell count, Gram stain of urethral drainage, urethral culture or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) probe, and referral for syphilis and HIV testing in sexually active patients. Acute testicular pain should never be ignored, and it should be distinguished from testicular torsion, which is a surgical emergency.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2534">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The selection of an antibiotic depends on the causative organism; if epididymitis is associated with an STI, the patient&#x2019;s partner should also receive antimicrobial therapy. The spermatic cord may be infiltrated with a local anesthetic agent to relieve pain if the patient is seen within the first 24 hours after onset of pain. Supportive interventions also include reduction in physical activity, scrotal support and elevation, ice packs, anti-inflammatory agents, analgesics (including nerve blocks), and sitz baths. Urethral instrumentation (e.g., catheter insertion) is avoided. The patient is observed for scrotal abscess formation as well.</p>
<p class="indent">In chronic epididymitis, a 4- to 6-week course of antibiotic therapy for bacterial pathogens is prescribed. An epididymectomy (excision of the epididymis from the testis) may be performed for patients who have recurrent, refractory, and incapacitating episodes of this infection. With long-term epididymitis, the passage of sperm may be obstructed. If the obstruction is bilateral, infertility may result.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2535">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bed rest is prescribed, and the scrotum is elevated with a scrotal bridge or folded towel to prevent traction on the spermatic cord, to promote venous drainage, and to relieve pain. Antimicrobial agents are given as prescribed until the acute inflammation subsides. Intermittent cold compresses to the scrotum may help ease the pain. Later, local heat or sitz baths may help resolve the inflammation. Analgesic medications are given for pain relief as prescribed.</p>
<p class="indent">The nurse instructs the patient to avoid straining, lifting, and sexual stimulation until the infection is under control. He should continue taking analgesic agents and antibiotics as prescribed and using ice packs if necessary, to relieve discomfort. He needs to know that it may take 4 weeks or longer for the inflammation to resolve.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>