<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2552">Cancer of the Penis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Penile cancer accounts for less than 1% of cancers among men in the United States. An estimated 1290 new cancer cases and 300 expected deaths occur each year (ACS, 2020). The 5-year survival rates for cancer localized to the penis approaches 80%, but this statistic drops to 52% if the lymph nodes are involved and to 18% if the cancer has spread beyond the inguinal lymph nodes (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>). Penile cancer is much more common in some parts of Africa and South America, where it accounts for up to 10% of cancers in men. Because the penis contains different cell types, penile cancer can arise in each type of cell, which determines the prognosis. Types of penile cancer include squamous cell carcinoma (most common; 95% of cases), epidermoid penile cancer, verrucous carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, in situ carcinomas <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1776" title="1776"></span>(erythroplasia of Queyrat and Bowen disease), basal cell penile cancer, melanoma, and sarcomas (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>). Several risk factors for penile cancer have been identified, including lack of circumcision, poor genital hygiene, phimosis, HPV, smoking, ultraviolet light treatment of psoriasis on the penis, increasing age (two thirds of cases occur in men older than 65 years), penile metastasis secondary to bladder cancer, lichen sclerosus, and balanitis xerotica obliterans (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>). However, the exact cause remains unclear. Because penile cancer is rare, there has been little improvement in diagnostic and staging tests, understanding of risk factors, and development of treatment modalities.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2553">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The penile lesion usually alerts the patient to the presence of penile cancer; however, men may delay seeking treatment for more than a year because of embarrassment, fear, or lack of understanding. Common clinical presentations are a painless lump, ulcer, or wartlike growth on the skin of the penis; a change in skin color such as a red rash, bluish growths, or whitish patches; and malodorous and persistent discharge in late stages.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2554">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Penile cancer involves the glans most frequently (48%), followed by lesions of the foreskin (21%), the coronal sulcus (6%), the penile shaft (less than 2%), the urethra, and regional or distant lymph nodes (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>). A thorough physical examination is necessary, including assessment and palpation of the penis and the inguinal lymph nodes. The size, location, borders, consistency, fixation, and character and time of onset of the penile lesions should be noted. Incisional or excisional biopsy is performed to determine the cell types of the penile cancer. Further staging tests using ultrasonography, MRI, or CT scan may be obtained to determine the extent of local lesions, if metastatic disease is present, and treatment options.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2555">Prevention</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The best way to reduce the risk of penile cancer is to avoid known risk factors whenever possible (ACS, 2020). Avoidance of sexual practices that are likely to result in HPV infection may reduce the risk of penile cancer. Gardasil, a vaccine that protects against infection with HPV, the cause of 90% of genital warts, is recommended for males 9 through 26 years old (ACS, 2020). Although men who are uncircumcised have a greater incidence of penile cancer than men who are circumcised, the more important factor in preventing penile cancer is good genital hygiene. Circumcision is not recommended as a prevention strategy (ACS, 2020).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2556">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment varies depending on the type and stage of penile cancer, location of the lesion, overall physical health, and personal preferences about treatments and side effects. Treatment emphasis is on minimizing the cancer&#x2019;s invasiveness and preserving organ function (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Goonewardene, Pietrzak, &#x0026; Albala, 2019</a>). The goal of treatment in invasive penile cancer is complete excision with adequate margins. Surgery is the most common treatment method used in all forms of the disease. Depending on the stage and invasiveness of the cancer, therapeutic options may include simple excision, electrodesiccation and curettage, cryosurgery, Mohs surgery (microscopically controlled surgery), yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) laser surgery, wide local excision, circumcision, and penectomy (surgical removal of part of the penis or the entire penis). Organ-sparing surgical approaches are preferable. Partial penectomy is preferred to total penectomy because patients can then participate in sexual activity, stand for urination, and maintain cosmesis. Modern reconstructive surgical techniques are providing more options for patients. The shaft of the penis can still respond to sexual arousal with an erection and has the sensory capacity for orgasm and ejaculation. Total penectomy is indicated if the tumor is not amenable to conservative treatment. After a total penectomy, the patient may still experience orgasm with stimulation of the perineum and scrotal area.</p>
<p class="indent">Topical chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil cream or biologic therapy may also be effective. Radiation therapy is used to treat small squamous cell carcinomas of the penis and for palliation in advanced tumors or cases of lymph node metastasis.</p>
<p class="indent">Penile cancer spreads primarily to the inguinal lymph nodes; thus, appropriate lymph node management plays a significant role in survival. Because enlarged inguinal lymph nodes are caused by inflammation in 50% of cases, patients who present with enlarged lymph nodes should undergo treatment of the primary lesion followed by a 4- to 6-week course of oral broad-spectrum antibiotic agents. Persistent enlarged lymph nodes after antibiotic therapy should be considered to be metastatic disease and treated with either a sentinel lymph node biopsy (to determine presence of cancer) or with pelvic and bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection. If extensive pelvic lymph node involvement is present, the patient should receive adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy and postoperative radiation therapy (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Goonewardene et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>