<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2544">Hydrocele</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hydrocele:&lt;/b&gt; a collection of fluid, generally in the tunica vaginalis of the testis, although it also may collect within the spermatic cord">hydrocele</button></strong> is a collection of fluid most commonly located between the visceral and parietal layers of the tunica vaginalis of the testis, although it may also collect within the spermatic cord. This condition is the most common cause of scrotal swelling. At birth, 1 in 10 infants has a hydrocele, which usually resolves without treatment within the first year of life. Acute hydroceles primarily develop in adults older than 40&#x00A0;years; they may occur in association with inflammation (e.g., radiation therapy), infection, epididymitis, local injury, or systemic infectious disease (e.g., mumps). Chronic hydroceles may occur related to the imbalance between fluid secretion and reabsorption in the tunica vaginalis. On physical examination, an easily transilluminated, painless, extratesticular mass is found. Hydrocele can be differentiated from a hernia by transillumination; a hydrocele transmits light, whereas a hernia does not. Ultrasonography is recommended for large hydroceles to differentiate them from testicular tumors (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment is usually not required unless the hydrocele is large, bulky, tense, or uncomfortable; compromises testicular circulation; or causes an undesirable appearance. Treatment may involve surgical excision or needle aspiration. Hydrocelectomy (surgical excision) may be performed in an outpatient setting under general or spinal anesthesia with the goal of prevention of recurrence by excising the tunica vaginalis or sclerosing the visceral and parietal layers. Surgical excision involves resection or suturing together the two layers. A drainage tube may be required, and the patient is advised to wear a bulky dressing over the incisional site for a few days after the procedure. To reduce swelling, ice packs are applied to the scrotal area during the first 24 hours. A scrotal athletic supporter may be worn for a period of time postoperatively for comfort and support. Surgical risks include hematoma in the loose scrotal tissues, infection, or injury to the scrotum.</p>
<p class="indent">Needle aspiration is another option used to remove the fluid in the scrotum. Because it is common for fluid to reaccumulate, this treatment may be followed by the injection of a sclerosing agent to prevent this recurrence. This option may be used for men who are at poor surgical risks. Potential risks include infection and scrotal pain.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>