<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2516">Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (Enlarged Prostate)</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong>Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)</strong>, a noncancerous enlargement or hypertrophy of the prostate, is one of the most common diseases in aging men. It can cause bothersome lower urinary tract symptoms that affect quality of life by interfering with normal daily activities and sleep patterns (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>). BPH typically occurs in men older than 40 years. By the time they reach 60 years, 50% of men will have BPH. It affects as many as 90% of men by 85 years of age. BPH is the second most common cause of surgical intervention in men older than 60 years.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2517">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The cause of BPH is not well understood, but testicular androgens have been implicated. Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a metabolite of testosterone, is a critical mediator of prostatic growth. Estrogens may also play a role in the cause of BPH; BPH generally occurs when men have elevated estrogen levels and when prostate tissue becomes more sensitive to estrogens and less responsive to DHT. Smoking, heavy alcohol consumption, obesity, reduced activity level, hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, and a Western diet (high in animal fat and protein <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1754" title="1754"></span>and refined carbohydrates, low in fiber) are risk factors for BPH (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3853">El Jalby, Thomas, Elterman, et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">BPH develops over a prolonged period; changes in the urinary tract are slow and insidious. BPH is a result of complex interactions involving resistance in the prostatic urethra to mechanical and spastic effects, bladder pressure during voiding, detrusor muscle strength, neurologic functioning, and general physical health (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">McCance et al., 2018</a>). The hypertrophied lobes of the prostate may obstruct the bladder neck or urethra, causing incomplete emptying of the bladder and urinary retention. As a result, hydroureter (dilation of the ureters) and hydronephrosis (dilation of the kidneys) can gradually occur. Urinary retention may result in UTIs because urine that remains in the urinary tract serves as a medium for infective organisms.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2518">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">BPH may or may not lead to lower urinary tract symptoms; if symptoms occur, they may range from mild to severe. Severity of symptoms increases with age, and half of men with BPH report having moderate to severe symptoms. Obstructive and irritative symptoms may include urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia, hesitancy in starting urination, decreased and intermittent force of stream and the sensation of incomplete bladder emptying, abdominal straining with urination, a decrease in the volume and force of the urinary stream, dribbling (urine dribbles out after urination), and complications of acute urinary retention and recurrent UTIs. Normally, residual urine amounts to no more than 50 mL in the middle-aged adult and less than 50 to 100 mL in the older adult (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Weber &#x0026; Kelley, 2018</a>). Ultimately, chronic urinary retention and large residual volumes can lead to azotemia (accumulation of nitrogenous waste products) and kidney failure.</p>
<p class="indent">Generalized symptoms may also be noted, including fatigue, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and pelvic discomfort. Other disorders that produce similar symptoms include urethral stricture, prostate cancer, neurogenic bladder, and urinary bladder stones.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2519">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The health history focuses on the urinary tract, previous surgical procedures, general health issues, family history of prostate disease, and fitness for possible surgery (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3828">DeNunzio, Lombardo, Cicione, et al., 2020</a>). A voiding diary is used by the patient to record voiding frequency and urine volume. A DRE often reveals a large, rubbery, and nontender prostate gland. A urinalysis to screen for hematuria and UTI is recommended. A PSA level is obtained if the patient is without a terminal disease and for whom knowledge of the presence of prostate cancer would change management. The American Urological Association (AUA) Symptom Index or International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) can be used to assess the severity of symptoms (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Smith et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Other diagnostic tests may include recording urinary flow rate and the measurement of postvoid residual urine. If invasive therapy is considered, urodynamic studies, urethrocystoscopy, and ultrasound may be performed. Complete blood studies are performed. Cardiac status and respiratory function are assessed because a high percentage of patients with BPH have cardiac or respiratory disorders due to their age.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2520">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goals of medical management of BPH are to improve quality of life, improve urine flow, relieve obstruction, prevent disease progression, and minimize complications. Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms, the cause of disease, the severity of the obstruction, and the patient&#x2019;s condition.</p>
<p class="indent">If a patient is admitted on an emergency basis because he is unable to void, he is immediately catheterized. The ordinary catheter may be too soft and pliable to advance through the urethra into the bladder. In such cases, a stylet (thin wire) is introduced (by a urologist) into the catheter to prevent the catheter from collapsing when it encounters resistance. A metal catheter with a pronounced prostatic curve may be used if obstruction is severe. A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;cystostomy:&lt;/b&gt; surgical creation of an opening into the urinary bladder">cystostomy</button></strong> (incision into the bladder) may be needed to provide urinary drainage.</p>
<p class="indent">Discussion of all treatment options by the primary provider enables the patient to make an informed decision based on symptom severity, the effect of BPH on his quality of life, and preference. Patients with mild symptoms and those with moderate or severe symptoms, who are not bothered by them and have not developed complications, may be managed with &#x201C;watchful waiting.&#x201D; With this approach, the patient is monitored and reexamined annually but receives no active intervention (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">DeNunzio et al., 2020</a>). Other therapeutic choices include pharmacologic treatment, minimally invasive procedures, and surgery.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Pharmacologic treatment for BPH includes the use of alpha-adrenergic blockers and 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>). Alpha-adrenergic blockers, which include alfuzosin, terazosin, doxazosin, and tamsulosin, relax the smooth muscle of the bladder neck and prostate. This improves urine flow and relieves symptoms of BPH. Side effects include dizziness, headache, asthenia/fatigue, orthostatic hypotension, rhinitis, and sexual dysfunction (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple, Steers, &#x0026; Evans, 2020</a>; <a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Another method of treatment involves hormonal manipulation with antiandrogen agents. The 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, finasteride and dutasteride, are used to prevent the conversion of testosterone to DHT and decrease prostate size. Side effects include decreased libido, ejaculatory dysfunction, erectile dysfunction, gynecomastia (breast enlargement), and flushing. Combination therapy (doxazosin and finasteride) has decreased symptoms and reduced clinical progression of BPH (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>; <a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The use of alternative and complementary phytotherapeutic agents and other dietary supplements (<em>Serenoa repens</em> [saw palmetto berry] and <em>Pygeum africanum</em> [African plum]) are not recommended by the medical community, although they are commonly used (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Rowland, McNabney, &#x0026; Donarski, 2019</a>). They may function by interfering with the conversion of testosterone to DHT. In addition, <em>S. repens</em> may directly block the ability of DHT to stimulate prostate cell growth. These agents should not be used with finasteride, dutasteride, or estrogen-containing medications (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Rowland et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Other treatment options include minimally invasive procedures and resection of the prostate gland.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1754</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1755" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1755">p. 1755</span></div>
<p class="h7">Minimally Invasive Therapy</p>
<p class="nonindent">Several forms of minimally invasive therapy may be used to treat BPH. Transurethral microwave thermotherapy involves the application of heat to prostatic tissue. High-energy devices (CoreTherm, Prostatron, Targis) and low-energy devices (TherMatrx) are available (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>). A transurethral probe is inserted into the urethra, and microwaves are directed to the prostate tissue. The targeted tissue becomes necrotic and sloughs. To minimize damage to the urethra and decrease the discomfort from the procedure, some systems have a water-cooling apparatus.</p>
<p class="indent">Other minimally invasive treatment options include transurethral needle ablation by radiofrequency energy and insertion of a stent. Transurethral needle ablation uses low-level radiofrequencies delivered by thin needles placed in the prostate gland to produce localized heat that destroys prostate tissue while sparing other tissues. The body then reabsorbs the dead tissue. Prostatic stents are associated with significant complications (e.g., encrustation, infection, chronic pain); therefore, they are used only for patients with urinary retention and in patients who are at poor surgical risks (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Cheng et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="h7">Surgical Resection</p>
<p class="nonindent">Surgical resection of the prostate gland is another option for patients with moderate to severe lower urinary tract symptoms of BPH and for those with acute urinary retention or other complications. The specific surgical approach (open or endoscopic) and the energy source (electrocautery vs. laser) are based on the surgeon&#x2019;s experience, the size of the prostate gland, the presence of other medical disorders, and the patient&#x2019;s preference. If surgery is to be performed, all clotting defects must be corrected and medications for anticoagulation withheld because bleeding is a potential complication of prostate surgery.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong>Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP)</strong> remains the benchmark for surgical treatment for BPH. It involves the surgical removal of the inner portion of the prostate through an endoscope inserted through the urethra; no external skin incision is made. It can be performed with ultrasound guidance. The treated tissue either vaporizes or becomes necrotic and sloughs. The procedure is performed in the outpatient setting and usually results in less postoperative bleeding than a traditional surgical prostatectomy.</p>
<p class="indent">Other surgical options for BPH include transurethral incision of the prostate (TUIP), transurethral electrovaporization, laser therapy, and open prostatectomy (<a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Chapple et al., 2020</a>; <a href="c53-sec22.xhtml#bib3902">Smith et al., 2019</a>). TUIP is an outpatient procedure used to treat smaller prostates. One or two cuts are made in the prostate and prostate capsule to reduce constriction of the urethra and decrease resistance to flow of urine out of the bladder; no tissue is removed. Open <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;prostatectomy:&lt;/b&gt; surgical removal of the entire prostate, the prostate urethra, and the attached seminal vesicles plus the ampulla of the vas deferens">prostatectomy</button></strong> involves the surgical removal of the inner portion of the prostate via a suprapubic, retropubic, or perineal (rare) approach for large prostate glands. Prostatectomy may also be performed laparoscopically or by robotic-assisted laparoscopy.</p>
<p class="indent">Nursing management of patients undergoing these procedures is described later in this chapter.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>