<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2565">Health Risks</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The root cause of health risks or disparities among people who are LGBTQ is stigma (i.e., negative and unfair beliefs). For reasons beyond the scope of this chapter, people learn to stigmatize some human differences such as skin color and sexual orientation, whereas other differences are not stigmatized, such as eye color or left-handedness (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">Eliason &#x0026; Chinn, 2018</a>). People who are LGBTQ have historically been viewed as different or deviant, which is known as stigmatization. The stigma of people who are LGBTQ has led to many social <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1783" title="1783"></span>effects, such as lack of recognition of relationships and family, the right to adopt, hate crimes and violence, discrimination in employment and education, and discrimination in housing (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">Eliason &#x0026; Chinn, 2018</a>). A person who is LGBTQ does not experience health risks simply because they identify as gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender; the stigma associated with their LGBTQ identity is what puts them at risk for certain health disparities.</p>
<p class="indent">As compared to people who are heterosexual and cisgender, people who are LGBTQ are at greater risk for certain physical and mental health issues. In terms of mental health disorders, people who are LGBTQ have a higher rate of depression and anxiety (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3915">Bostwick, Hughes, Steffen, et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3945">Ross, Salway, Tarasoff, et al., 2018</a>; <a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3957">Witcomb, Bouman, Claes, et al., 2018</a>) and experience more suicidality (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3935">Lyons, Walters, Jack, et al., 2019</a>; <a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">McNeil, Ellis, &#x0026; Eccles, 2017</a>). Nearly 50% of people who are transgender have reported suicide attempts. Moreover, people who are LGBTQ tend to experience more victimization, such as physical or verbal harassment, which is associated with higher rates of depression and suicidality (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3917">Burks, Cramer, Henderson, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Women who are lesbian, bisexual, or queer tend to be at greater risk for obesity and cardiovascular disease as compared to heterosexual women (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3948">Simoni, Smith, Oost, et&#x00A0;al., 2017</a>). Obesity in women who are lesbian, bisexual, or queer is linked to dysregulated eating, such as emotional- or binge-eating. The causes of dysregulated eating are complex and include biological, psychological, and social factors. In women who are lesbian, bisexual, or queer, stigma is one of the root causes of obesity. Stigmatizing experiences, such as discrimination or victimization, leads to emotional distress, which in turn is associated with dysregulated eating as a coping strategy (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">Mason, Smith, &#x0026; Lavender, 2019</a>) (see <a href="c42.xhtml">Chapter 42</a> for further discussion on obesity).</p>
<p class="indent">Men who are gay or bisexual and transgender women have higher rates of infection with the human immune deficiency virus (HIV) as compared to the general population. Men who are gay or bisexual is the population most affected by HIV in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2019a). People who are transgender receive an HIV diagnosis at three times the rate of the national average (CDC, 2019b). Among these populations, rates of HIV are even higher among certain subgroups, especially people who are African American and young adult (see <a href="c32.xhtml">Chapter 32</a> for further discussion on HIV).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>