<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2561">Sexuality and Gender Identity</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Understanding the meaning and significance of the concepts and terminology for sexuality and gender identity is important to caring for patients who are LGBTQ.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2562">Sexuality</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Human sexuality is the way people experience and express themselves sexually. This involves biological, physical, emotional, or social feelings. Sexual orientation, which is a component of sexuality, is different than gender (see discussion below). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;sexual orientation:&lt;/b&gt; umbrella term that refers to romantic, emotional, or sexual attraction to persons of the opposite gender, the same gender, or to both or more than one gender">Sexual orientation</button></strong> is an umbrella term that refers to romantic, emotional, or sexual attraction to persons of the opposite gender, the same gender, or to more than one gender. There are many terms that people use to describe their sexual orientation; however, the most commonly used terms are <em>heterosexual</em> or <em>straight</em>, <em>gay</em> or <em>lesbian</em>, <em>bisexual</em>, and <em>queer</em>.</p>
<p class="indent">People who are attracted to a different gender, such as women who are attracted to men, typically identify as heterosexual or straight. People who are attracted to the same gender, such as men attracted to men, often identify as <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;gay:&lt;/b&gt; people who are romantically, emotionally, or sexually attracted to the same gender, such as men attracted to men">gay</button></strong>. Gay women may prefer the term <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;lesbian:&lt;/b&gt; a term that gay women, or those women who are romantically, emotionally, or sexually attracted to other women, may prefer to use">lesbian</button></strong>. People who are attracted to both male and female genders usually identify as <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;bisexual:&lt;/b&gt; people who are romantically, emotionally, or sexually attracted to both male and female genders">bisexual</button></strong>.</p>
<p class="indent">Although the term <em>queer</em> was historically used as a word of insult, many people now choose to use it to identify their sexual orientation. People who are <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;queer:&lt;/b&gt; people who are romantically, emotionally, or sexually attracted to numerous genders (male, female, transgender, intersex, etc.) or people who identify as nonheterosexual but do not want to use labels, such as gay, lesbian, or bisexual">queer</button></strong> typically experience attractions to numerous genders (male, female, transgender, intersex, etc.). A person who does not want to use labels, such as gay, lesbian, or bisexual, may also use the term queer to identify as a nonheterosexual.</p>
<p class="indent">People who are exploring or are unsure of their sexual orientation may refer to themselves as <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;questioning:&lt;/b&gt; a person who is unsure or is still exploring their sexual orientation or is concerned about applying a social label to themselves">questioning</button></strong>. Questioning one&#x2019;s own sexuality can be difficult and confusing and can take years to understand. This term can also apply to people who are concerned about applying a social label (e.g., gay, lesbian, bisexual, queer) to themselves and may prefer to use this term.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2563">Gender Identity</h5>
<p class="nonindent">To fully understand the term <em>gender identity</em>, the concepts of <em>sex</em> and <em>gender</em> must be discussed first. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;sex:&lt;/b&gt; refers to the physical or biological characteristics that distinguish women and men, such as chromosomes, genitals, and hormones">Sex</button></strong> in the context of gender identity refers to the physical or biological characteristics that distinguish women and men, such as chromosomes, genitals, and hormones (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">Eliason &#x0026; Chinn, 2018</a>). For example, women have XX chromosomes, a uterus and ovaries, and the primary sex hormone is estrogen; whereas, men have XY chromosomes, a penis and testicles, and the primary sex hormone is testosterone. In most societies, people are assigned either the male or female sex at birth. However, some persons do not clearly have these defined binary sets of sex chromosomes or may not have clearly distinguishable genitalia. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;intersex:&lt;/b&gt; a term used for a person who is born with biological traits that do not fit into those that traditionally characterize either male or female">Intersex</button></strong> is a term used for a person who is born with biological traits that do not fit into those that traditionally characterize either male or female.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;gender:&lt;/b&gt; set of socially constructed norms and behaviors that are taught to women and men">Gender</button></strong> is a set of socially constructed characteristics of women and men (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3958">World Health Organization, 2019</a>). Although a person is either assigned as male or female at birth based on sex characteristics, they are taught norms and behaviors that are appropriate for their gender. Gender is usually the first thing we notice about a person based on cues, such as voice, communication style, hairstyle, clothing, and mannerisms. Gender norms, behaviors, and cues vary from society to society and can be changed.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;gender identity:&lt;/b&gt; the internal self-conception of one&#x2019;s gender">Gender identity</button></strong> refers to how a person feels about themselves or their self-concept as female or male, feminine or masculine, or as something on the continuum between the two extremes (<a href="c54-sec05.xhtml#bib3971">Eliason &#x0026; Chinn, 2018</a>). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;cisgender:&lt;/b&gt; people who identify with the gender that matches the sex assigned to them at birth">Cisgender</button></strong> is a term that often refers to people who identify with the gender that matches the sex assigned to them at birth (e.g., a person with a female sex that identifies as a woman). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;transgender:&lt;/b&gt; umbrella term used to describe the full range of people whose gender identity does not match with the sex assigned to them at birth">Transgender</button></strong> is an umbrella term used to describe the full range of people whose gender identity does not match with the sex assigned to them at birth. Although there is a diversity of terms that transgender people may use to identify their gender (e.g., trans, gender nonconforming, agender, and genderqueer), this chapter will use two main terms: transgender woman and transgender man. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;transgender woman:&lt;/b&gt; refers to a person who was assigned a male sex at birth but identifies with a female or feminine gender">Transgender woman</button></strong>, or male to female, refers to a person who was assigned a male sex at birth but identifies with a female or feminine gender. <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;transgender man:&lt;/b&gt; refers to a person who was assigned a female sex at birth but identifies with a male or masculine gender">Transgender man</button></strong>, or female to male, refers to a person who was assigned a female sex at birth but identifies with a male or masculine gender.</p>
<p class="indent">It is important to remember that gender identity and sexual orientation are two different self-concepts. Sexual orientation refers to a person&#x2019;s attraction, and gender identity refers to how a person feels about their gender. For example, a transgender man who is attracted only to men has a male gender identity and a gay sexual orientation. Health care professionals should never assume a person&#x2019;s sexual orientation or gender identity based on physical characteristics, mannerisms, communication style, voice, clothing, or hairstyle.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>