<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1798" title="1798"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 55</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Assessment of Integumentary Function</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe the structures and functions of the skin, hair, and nails.</span></li>
<li><span>Discriminate between normal and abnormal assessment findings of the skin, hair, and nails.</span></li>
<li><span>Recognize and evaluate the major alterations in skin, hair, and nails by applying the patient&#x2019;s health history and physical assessment findings.</span></li>
<li><span>Compare and contrast the patterns and typical distributions of primary and secondary skin lesions.</span></li>
<li><span>Distinguish common skin manifestations associated with systemic disease.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify the common diagnostic tests used in evaluating skin disorders and related nursing implications.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Assessment</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Cellular Regulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Tissue Integrity</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">alopecia:</span> loss of hair from any cause</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">ecchymosis:</span> bleeding into the skin and tissue, initially evidenced by varied color (e.g., purple, black) that gradually fades to green, yellow, or brown over time</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">erythema:</span> redness of the skin caused by dilation of the capillaries due to injury, irritation, inflammation, or various skin conditions</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hirsutism:</span> the condition of having excessive hair growth</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hyperpigmentation:</span> increase in the melanin of the skin, resulting in an increase in pigmentation</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hypopigmentation:</span> decrease in the melanin of the skin, resulting in a loss of pigmentation</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">keratin:</span> an insoluble, fibrous protein that forms the outer skin layer</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">keratinocytes:</span> arising from the innermost layer of the epidermis, synthesize the insoluble protein, keratin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">Langerhans cells:</span> dendritic clear cells in the epidermis that carry surface receptors for immunoglobulin and complement and that are active participants in delayed hypersensitivity of the skin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">melanin:</span> the substance responsible for coloration of the skin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">melanocytes:</span> cells of the skin that produce melanin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">Merkel cells:</span> cells of the epidermis that play a role in transmission of sensory messages</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">petechiae:</span> pinpoint red spots that appear on the skin as a result of blood leakage into the skin</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">rete ridges:</span> undulations and furrows that appear at the lower edge of the epidermis at the dermal junction where these two skin layers are cemented together</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">sebaceous glands:</span> glands that exist within the epidermis and secrete sebum to keep the skin soft and pliable</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">sebum:</span> fatty secretion of the sebaceous glands</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">telangiectasias:</span> vascular structures; red marks on the skin caused by distention of the superficial blood vessels</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">vitiligo:</span> a localized or widespread condition characterized by destruction of the melanocytes in circumscribed areas of the skin, resulting in white patches</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">Wood light:</span> ultraviolet light used for diagnosing skin conditions</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">In the United States, as many as one in three people will have a skin disorder or disease at any given time. Skin disorders are commonly observed in inpatient and outpatient nursing practice settings. The assessment of the skin can provide important information about the general health of the patient or clues to systemic conditions that manifest in the skin.</p>
<p class="indent">Any medical treatment can suddenly induce an episode of skin symptoms such as itching, skin discomfort, or rash. The psychological stress of illness or various personal and family problems may be exhibited outwardly as dermatologic disorders. In certain systemic conditions, such as hepatitis and some cancers, dermatologic manifestations may be the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1799" title="1799"></span>first sign of the disorder and the main reason a patient seeks health care.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>