<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2692">Wound Coverage: Grafts and Flaps</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Various surgical techniques, including skin grafts and flaps, are used to cover skin wounds.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2693">Skin Grafts</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Skin grafting is a technique in which a section of skin is detached from its own blood supply and transferred as free tissue to a distant (recipient) site. Skin grafting can be used to repair almost any type of wound and is the most common form of reconstructive surgery.</p>
<p class="indent">Skin grafts are commonly used to repair surgical defects such as those that result from excision of skin tumors, to cover areas denuded of skin (e.g., burns), and to cover wounds in which insufficient skin is available to permit wound closure. They are also used when primary closure of the wound increases the risk of complications or when primary wound closure would interfere with function. Skin grafts may be classified as autografts, homografts, or xenografts (see <a href="c57.xhtml">Chapter 57</a> for further discussion of skin grafts).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2694">Flaps</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Another form of wound coverage is provided by flaps. A flap is a segment of tissue that remains attached at one end (i.e., a base or pedicle) while the other end is moved to a recipient area. Its survival depends on functioning arterial and venous blood supplies and lymphatic drainage in its pedicle or base (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4032">del Rosario &#x0026; Barkley, 2017</a>). A flap differs from a graft in that a portion of the tissue is attached to its original site and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1860" title="1860"></span>retains its blood supply. An exception is the free flap, which is described later.</p>
<p class="indent">Flaps may consist of skin, mucosa, muscle, adipose tissue, omentum, and bone. They are used for wound coverage and provide bulk, especially when bone, tendon, blood vessels, or nerve tissue is exposed. Flaps are used to repair defects caused by congenital deformity, trauma, or tumor ablation (removal, usually by excision) in an adjacent part of the body (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4032">del Rosario &#x0026; Barkley, 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Flaps offer an aesthetic solution because a flap retains the color and texture of the donor area; is more likely to survive than a graft; and can be used to cover nerves, tendons, and blood vessels. However, several surgical procedures are usually required to advance a flap. The major complication is necrosis of the pedicle or base as a result of failure of the blood supply.</p>
<p class="indent">A free flap or free tissue transfer is completely severed from the body and transferred to another site. A free flap receives early vascular supply from microvascular anastomosis with vessels at the recipient site. The procedure usually is completed in one step, eliminating the need for a series of surgical procedures to move the flap. Microvascular surgery allows surgeons to use a variety of donor sites for tissue reconstruction (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Hsieh &#x0026; Bhatt, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>