<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2601">Perineal and Perianal Pruritus</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Pruritus of the genital and anal regions may be caused by small particles of fecal material lodged in the perianal crevices or attached to anal hairs. Alternatively, it may result from perianal skin damage caused by scratching, moisture, and decreased skin resistance as a result of corticosteroid or antibiotic therapy. Other possible causes of perianal itching include local lesions such as hemorrhoids, fungal or yeast infections, and pinworm infestation. Conditions reviewed in <a href="c56-sec03.xhtml#ct56-3">Chart 56-3</a> may also result in pruritus. Occasionally, no cause can be identified.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2602">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is instructed to follow proper hygiene measures and to discontinue home and OTC remedies. The perineal or anal area should be rinsed with lukewarm water and blotted dry with cotton balls. Premoistened tissues may be used after defecation (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Breen &#x0026; Bleday, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">As part of health education, the nurse instructs the patient to avoid bathing in water that is too hot and to avoid using bubble baths, sodium bicarbonate, and detergent soaps, all of which aggravate dryness. To keep the perineal or perianal skin as dry as possible, patients should avoid wearing underwear made of synthetic fabrics. The patient should also avoid vasodilating agents (e.g., alcohol), stimulants (e.g., caffeine), and mechanical irritants (e.g., rough or woolen clothing). A diet that includes adequate fiber may help maintain soft stools and prevent minor trauma to the anal mucosa (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Breen &#x0026; Bleday, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>