<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2651">Generalized Exfoliative Dermatitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Generalized exfoliative dermatitis, also called <em>erythroderma,</em> is characterized by a scaling erythematous dermatitis that may involve more than 90% of the skin (C&#x00E9;sar, Cruz, Mota, et al., 2016). Generalized exfoliative dermatitis has a variety of causes. It may occur as a result of a reactive process (e.g., drug allergy) or may be secondary to an underlying skin disease (e.g., psoriasis, contact dermatitis, atopic dermatitis) or a systemic disease (e.g., lymphoma, leukemia). The cause is idiopathic (i.e., unknown) in approximately 16% of cases (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Kellen &#x0026; Berlin, 2016</a>; <a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>). Although generalized exfoliative dermatitis may occur at any age, it more commonly appears in those between the ages of 41 and 61 years. It occurs two to four times more commonly in men than in women (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Kellen &#x0026; Berlin, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2652">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">This condition starts as a patchy or generalized erythematous eruption accompanied by fever, malaise, and chills. The skin color changes from pink to dark red. Afterward, the characteristic exfoliation (i.e., scaling) begins, usually in the form of thin flakes that leave the underlying skin smooth and red, with new scales forming as the older ones come off. It may be associated with chills, fever, prostration, and severe pruritus. There is a profound loss of stratum corneum (i.e., outermost layer of the skin), which causes capillary leakage, hypoalbuminemia, and negative nitrogen balance. Because of widespread dilation of cutaneous vessels, large amounts of body heat can be lost. Hair loss may accompany this disorder. The progression of these clinical manifestations varies, depending on the underlying cause. For instance, the progression from fever and scaling may be acute and progress over hours or a couple of days when generalized exfoliative dermatitis results from a drug reaction, or may be insidious and progress over weeks when it is secondary to a skin disease, such as psoriasis (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2653">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The presence of scaling erythematous dermatitis, particularly when it occurs in tandem with a known skin disease or a new prescription medication, increases the suspicion that generalized exfoliative dermatitis may be diagnosed. The patient frequently also presents with hypoalbuminemia and a negative nitrogen balance, as described previously, as well as an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate that is consistent with an underlying acute inflammatory process. A skin biopsy is indicated, because it may confirm the underlying cause and diagnosis (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2654">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The objectives of management are to discern and treat any underlying disorder, to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance, and to prevent infection. The treatment is individualized and supportive and should be initiated as soon as the condition is diagnosed.</p>
<p class="indent">The patient may be hospitalized. All medications that may be implicated are discontinued. A comfortable room temperature should be maintained because the patient does not have normal thermoregulatory control as a result of temperature fluctuations caused by vasodilation and evaporative water loss. Fluid and electrolyte balance must be maintained because there is considerable water and protein loss from the skin surface. Patients in a negative nitrogen balance may be prescribed enteral or parenteral therapy (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>) (see <a href="c39.xhtml">Chapters 39</a> and <a href="c41.xhtml">41</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2655">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Continual nursing assessment is carried out to prevent sepsis. The disrupted, erythematous, moist skin is susceptible to infection and becomes colonized with pathogenic organisms, which produce more inflammation. Antibiotic agents, which are prescribed if infection is present, are selected on the basis of culture and sensitivity.</p>
<p class="indent">Hypothermia may occur because of the increased blood flow in the skin, coupled with increased water loss through the skin, leads to heat loss by radiation, conduction, and evaporation. Changes in vital signs are closely monitored and reported. Intake and output are also closely monitored and reported <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1846" title="1846"></span>if there is variance.</p>
<p class="indent">Topical therapy is used to provide symptomatic relief. Soothing baths, compresses, and lubrication with emollients are used to treat the extensive dermatitis. Topical corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment (see <a href="c56-sec01.xhtml#tt56-3">Table 56-3</a>). The patient is likely to be extremely irritable because of the severe pruritus; sedating antihistamines (e.g., hydroxyzine) administered before bedtime may be prescribed to relieve the itching and promote sleep (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The use of oral or parenteral corticosteroids may be prescribed; however, their use is controversial. They are contraindicated when the cause of the condition is either not known or is suspected to be secondary to an underlying skin disease, such as psoriasis. When generalized exfoliative dermatitis occurs as a complication of psoriasis, systemic corticosteroids can exacerbate the condition (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Umar &#x0026; Kelly, 2019</a>). When a specific cause is known, more specific therapy may be used. The patient is advised to avoid all irritants in the future, particularly medications that are known to cause the condition (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Kellen &#x0026; Berlin, 2016</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>