<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2604">Hidradenitis Suppurativa</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic suppurative folliculitis of the perianal, axillary, and genital areas or under the breasts. It can produce abscesses or sinuses with scarring. It develops after puberty and diminishes in incidence after 50&#x00A0;years of age. Black Americans are at greater risk for hidradenitis suppurativa, as are patients who smoke and who have obesity. In addition, men are at greater risk for anogenital hidradenitis suppurativa, whereas women are at greater risk for axillary hidradenitis suppurativa. The cause is unknown, but it appears to have a genetic basis (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4087">Tchero, Herlin, Bekara, et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2605">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">It had been assumed for many years that hidradenitis suppurativa was caused by the blockage and infection of the sweat glands. However, recent evidence suggests that it is a primary disorder of follicular occlusion, often resulting in infection, that causes eventual hypertrophic formation of scar tissue in the area of the sweat glands (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2606">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hidradenitis suppurativa occurs more frequently in the axillae but also appears in inguinal folds, on the mons pubis, around the buttocks, areolae of the breasts, submammary fold, nape of the neck, and shoulders. The patient may present with a firm, pea-sized nodule that causes discomfort, or with a history of this type of nodule that then ruptures and discharges purulent drainage. The nodule then propagates, and multiple similar nodules will form adjacent to the initial nodule. The nodules become deep seated and, as they rupture, form scars. The nodules may coalesce or form &#x201C;bridges,&#x201D; become infected, and result in abscesses. As they coalesce, the patient will present with complaints of persistent pain (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2607">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is educated to use warm compresses and wear loose-fitting clothes over the nodules or lesions. Oral antibiotic agents such as erythromycin, tetracycline, minocycline, and doxycycline are frequently prescribed. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be indicated to relieve the pain. Silver-impregnated alginate dressings may be useful with some lesions. Incision and drainage of large suppurating areas with gauze packs inserted to facilitate drainage are often necessary. Rarely, the entire area is excised, removing the scar tissue and any infection. This surgery is drastic in that it may require the use of skin grafts (see <a href="c57.xhtml">Chapter 57</a>) and is performed only as a last resort. Carbon dioxide laser surgery (see later discussion) may be more effective than this type of excisional surgery (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Tchero et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>