<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2690">Kaposi Sarcoma</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Kaposi sarcoma is a malignancy of endothelial cells that line the small blood vessels. Kaposi sarcoma is manifested clinically by lesions of the skin, oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs. The skin lesions consist of reddish-purple to dark blue macules, plaques, or nodules. Kaposi sarcoma is subdivided into four categories (ACS, 2018):</p>
<ul class="bull56"><li><em>Classic Kaposi sarcoma</em> occurs predominantly in older adult men of Mediterranean or Jewish ancestry. Most patients have nodules or plaques on the lower extremities that rarely metastasize beyond this area. Classic Kaposi sarcoma is chronic, relatively benign, and rarely fatal.</li>
<li><em>Endemic (African) Kaposi sarcoma</em> affects people predominantly in the eastern half of Africa near the equator. Men are affected more often than women, and children can be affected as well. The disease may resemble classic Kaposi sarcoma, or it may infiltrate and progress to lymphadenopathic forms.</li>
<li><em>Iatrogenic/organ transplant&#x2013;associated Kaposi sarcoma</em> occurs in transplant recipients and in patients receiving long-term immunosuppressants, such as azathioprine, cyclosporine, or corticosteroids, such as prednisone.</li>
<li><em>AIDS-related or epidemic Kaposi sarcoma</em> occurs in people with AIDS. This form of Kaposi sarcoma is characterized by local skin lesions and disseminated visceral and mucocutaneous diseases. This is a more aggressive tumor type than other forms of Kaposi sarcoma. More information on AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma can be found in <a href="c32.xhtml">Chapter 32</a>.</li>
</ul>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>