<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2672">Benign Skin Tumors</h4>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2673">Cysts</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Cysts of the skin are epithelium-lined cavities that contain fluid or solid material. Epidermal cysts (epidermoid cysts) occur frequently and may be described as slow-growing, firm, elevated tumors found most frequently on the face, neck, upper chest, and back. Surgical removal with biopsy of the cyst is typically performed (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Docik, Johnson, &#x0026; Rizk, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Trichilemmal or pilar cysts are most frequently found on the scalp. They originate from the middle portion of the hair follicle and from the cells of the outer hair root sheath. Treatment is surgical removal (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib3993">Al Aboud, Yarrarapu, &#x0026; Patel, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2674">Seborrheic and Actinic Keratoses</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Seborrheic keratoses are benign, wartlike lesions of various sizes and colors, ranging from light tan to black. They are usually located on the face, shoulders, chest, and back and are the most common skin tumors seen in middle-aged and older adults. Although these lesions are benign, they should be assessed periodically for changes in appearance that may suggest malignant transformation (see later discussion) (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Norris, 2019</a>). They may be cosmetically unacceptable to the patient. Treatment is removal of the tumor tissue by excision, electrodesiccation (destruction of the skin lesions by monopolar high-frequency electric current) and curettage, or application of carbon dioxide or liquid nitrogen.</p>
<p class="indent">Actinic keratoses are premalignant skin lesions that develop in chronically sun-exposed areas of the body. They appear as rough, scaly patches with underlying erythema. These lesions may gradually transform into squamous cell carcinoma (see later discussion); they are usually removed by cryotherapy, electrodesiccation, or lasers, or they may be <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1852" title="1852"></span>treated with topical chemotherapeutic creams (e.g., 5-fluorouracil cream) (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2675">Verrucae: Warts</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Warts are common, benign skin tumors caused by infection with the human papillomavirus, which belongs to the DNA virus group. People of all ages may be affected, but the warts occur most frequently between the ages of 12 and 16 years. There are many types of warts.</p>
<p class="indent">As a rule, warts are asymptomatic, except when they occur on weight-bearing areas, such as the soles of the feet. They may be treated with locally applied laser therapy, liquid nitrogen, salicylic acid plasters, or electrodesiccation (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Dlugasch &#x0026; Story, 2021</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Warts occurring on the genitalia and perianal areas are known as condylomata acuminata. They may be transmitted sexually and are treated with liquid nitrogen, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, topically applied trichloroacetic acid, and curettage. Condylomata that affect the uterine cervix predispose the patient to cervical cancer (see <a href="c51.xhtml">Chapter 51</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2676">Angiomas</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Angiomas are benign vascular tumors that involve the skin and the subcutaneous tissues. They are present at birth and may occur as flat, violet-red patches (port-wine angiomas) or as raised, bright red, nodular lesions (i.e., hemangiomas of infancy, formerly known as strawberry angiomas). The latter tend to involute spontaneously within the first few years of life, but port-wine angiomas usually persist indefinitely. Most patients use masking cosmetics to camouflage the lesions. Cherry angiomas are small, smooth deep red papules found on the trunk of most adults older than 30 years of age that are benign and generally not considered cosmetically problematic (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2677">Pigmented Nevi: Moles</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Moles are common skin tumors of various sizes and shades, ranging from yellowish brown to black. They may be flat, macular lesions or elevated papules or nodules that occasionally contain hair. Most pigmented nevi are harmless lesions. However, in rare cases, malignant changes occur, and a melanoma develops at the site of the nevus. Nevi that show a change in color or size, become symptomatic (e.g., itch), or develop irregular borders should be removed to determine if malignant changes have occurred. Moles that occur in unusual places should be examined carefully for any irregularity and for notching of the border and variation in color. Nevi larger than 6 mm should be examined carefully. Excised nevi should be examined histologically (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Hunt, Schaffer, &#x0026; Bolognia, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2678">Keloids</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Keloids are benign overgrowths of fibrous tissue at the site of a scar or trauma. They are more common among people with dark skin. Keloids are asymptomatic but may cause disfigurement and cosmetic concerns. Treatment may consist of surgical excision, intralesional corticosteroid therapy or chemotherapy, laser therapy, or radiation (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2679">Dermatofibroma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A dermatofibroma is a common, benign tumor of connective tissue that occurs predominantly on the lower extremities. It is a firm, dome-shaped nodule that may be of the same color as the patient&#x2019;s skin, or may present in a variety of colors, most commonly pink or brown. Treatment is not typically indicated, unless the patient finds it cosmetically unappealing. The tumor may be removed surgically, although scarring can occur. If the tumor is prominently raised, liquid nitrogen application may be a better option for treatment (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Goldstein &#x0026; Goldstein, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2680">Neurofibromatosis: Von Recklinghausen Disease</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Neurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder manifested by <em>caf&#x00E9;-au-lait</em> macules (pigmented patches), axillary and inguinal freckling, cutaneous neurofibromas (soft, fleshy, benign skin tumors), and peripheral neurofibromas (benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors) that vary in size. Patients with neurofibromatosis are at risk for developing other benign and malignant tumors (e.g., sarcomas, astrocytomas) (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Korf, Lobbous, &#x0026; Metrock, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>