<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2608">Seborrheic Dermatitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><em>Seborrhea</em> is excessive production of sebum (secretion of sebaceous glands), which typically occurs in areas where sebaceous glands are normally found in large numbers, such as the face, scalp, eyebrows, eyelids, sides of the nose and upper lip, malar regions (cheeks), ears, axillae, under the breasts, groin, and gluteal crease of the buttocks. <em>Dermatosis</em> refers to a skin disorder; thus, the seborrheic dermatoses are skin disorders caused by an excessive production of sebum. <em>Dermatitis</em> refers to an inflammatory skin disorder. Seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the skin with a predilection for areas that are well supplied with sebaceous glands or lie between skin folds, where the bacterial count is high (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2609">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Two forms of seborrheic dermatitis can occur: an oily form and a dry form. Either form may start in childhood and continue throughout life. The oily form appears moist or greasy. There may be patches of sallow, greasy skin, with or without scaling, and slight erythema, predominantly on the forehead, nasolabial fold, beard area, scalp, and between adjacent skin surfaces in the regions of the axillae, groin, and breasts. Small pustules or papulopustules resembling acne may appear on the trunk. The dry form, consisting of flaky desquamation of the scalp with a profuse amount of fine, powdery scales, is commonly called <em>dandruff.</em> The mild forms of the disease are asymptomatic. When scaling occurs, it is often accompanied by pruritus, which may lead to scratching and secondary infections and excoriation.</p>
<p class="indent">Seborrheic dermatitis has a genetic predisposition. Hormones, nutritional status, infection, and emotional stress influence its course. The remissions and exacerbations of this condition should be explained to the patient. If a person has not previously been diagnosed with this condition and suddenly appears with a severe outbreak, a complete history and physical examination should be conducted. Infrequently, it may be a manifestation of a serious disorder, such as Parkinson&#x2019;s disease or human immune deficiency virus (HIV) infection (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Sasseville, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2610">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because there is no known cure for seborrhea, the objectives of therapy are to control the disorder and allow the skin to repair itself. Seborrheic dermatitis of the body and face may respond to a topically applied corticosteroid cream, which allays the secondary inflammatory response. However, this medication should be used with caution near the eyelids because it can lead to glaucoma and cataracts. As an alternative treatment, patients can wash the eyelids using baby shampoo and cotton swabs (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Handler, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with seborrheic dermatitis may develop a secondary candidal (yeast) infection in body creases or folds. To avoid this, patients should be advised to ensure maximum aeration of the skin and to clean carefully areas where there are creases or folds in the skin (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Doughty &#x0026; McNichol, 2016</a>). Patients with persistent candidiasis should be evaluated for diabetes.</p>
<p class="indent">The mainstay of dandruff treatment is proper, frequent shampooing (at least three times weekly) with medicated <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1832" title="1832"></span>shampoos. Two or three different types of shampoo should be used in rotation to prevent the seborrhea from becoming resistant to a particular shampoo. The shampoo is left on at least 5 to 10&#x00A0;minutes. As the condition of the scalp improves, the treatment can be less frequent. Antiseborrheic shampoos include those containing selenium sulfide suspension, zinc pyrithione, salicylic acid, or sulfur compounds, and tar shampoo that contains sulfur or salicylic acid (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Handler, 2019</a>; <a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Sasseville, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2611">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is educated that seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic condition that tends to reappear. The goal is to keep it under control through adherence to the treatment program (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Handler, 2019</a>; <a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Sasseville, 2020</a>). The patient is advised to avoid external irritants, excessive heat, and perspiration; rubbing and scratching prolong the disorder. To avoid secondary infection, the patient should air the skin and keep skin folds clean and dry.</p>
<p class="indent">Instructions for using medicated shampoos are reinforced for people with dandruff who require treatment. Frequent shampooing is contrary to some cultural practices; the nurse should be sensitive to these differences when educating the patient.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>