<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2629">Fungal (Mycotic) Skin Infections</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Fungi are eukaryotic microorganisms that belong to neither the plant nor the animal kingdoms. They are culprits in causing various common skin infections. In some cases, they affect only the skin and its appendages (hair and nails). In other cases, internal organs are involved, and the diseases may be life-threatening. However, superficial infections rarely cause even temporary disability and respond readily to treatment. Secondary infection with bacteria, <em>Candida,</em> or both organisms may occur.</p>
<p class="indent">The most common fungal skin infection is <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;tinea:&lt;/b&gt; a common superficial fungal infection on the skin or scalp (&lt;em&gt;synonym&lt;/em&gt;: ringworm)">tinea</button></strong>, which is also called <em>ringworm</em> because of its characteristic appearance of a ring or rounded tunnel under the skin. Tinea infections affect the head, body, groin, feet, and nails (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Sahoo &#x0026; Mahajan, 2016</a>). <a href="c56-sec14.xhtml#tt56-6">Table 56-6</a> summarizes the tinea infections and treatments.</p>
<p class="indent">To obtain a specimen for diagnosis, the lesion is cleaned and a scalpel or glass slide is used to remove scales from the margin of the lesion. The scales are dropped onto a slide to which potassium hydroxide has been added. The diagnosis is made by examination of the infected scales microscopically for spores and hyphae or by isolating the organism in culture. Under Wood&#x2019;s light, a specimen of infected hair appears fluorescent; this may be helpful in diagnosing some cases of tinea capitis (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Sahoo &#x0026; Mahajan, 2016</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>