<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2695">Cosmetic Procedures</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A variety of cosmetic procedures may be performed, including chemical face peels, dermabrasion, facial reconstructive surgery, and rhytidectomy (i.e., face-lift).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2696">Chemical Face Peeling</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chemical face peeling involves application of a chemical mixture to the face for superficial destruction of the epidermis and the upper layers of the dermis to treat fine wrinkles, keratoses, and pigment problems. It is especially useful for wrinkles at the upper and lower lip, forehead, and periorbital areas. The type of chemical used depends on the planned depth of the peel. The patient who is conscious feels a burning sensation that continues for 12 to 24 hours. Frequent small doses of analgesic and tranquilizing agents are prescribed to keep the patient comfortable. The most common complications include discoloration of the skin, infection of the burned area, persistent sensory changes or itching, and occasionally permanent scarring of the skin (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Fabbrocini, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2697">Dermabrasion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Dermabrasion is a form of skin abrasion used to treat acne scarring, aging, and sun-damaged skin. A special instrument (e.g., motor-driven wire brush, diamond-impregnated disc) is used. The epidermis and some superficial dermis are removed by a sanding-type action, and enough of the dermis is preserved to allow reepithelization of the treated areas. Results are best in the face because it is rich in intradermal epithelial elements (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4018">Bharti, Kirman, Molnar, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Patients with a history of herpes simplex viral infection are typically prescribed with prophylactic antiviral medications (e.g., valacyclovir) preprocedurally so that the physiologic stress of the procedure is less likely to cause a cutaneous herpes eruption. Tretinoin cream may be prescribed with instructions to apply it 2 to 3 weeks preoperatively; this is associated with accelerating reepithelialization post dermabrasion. Patients must be educated preprocedurally about the postprocedural dressing regimen and when to return to the primary provider to have dressing changes performed (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Wong, Arnold, &#x0026; Boeckmann, 2016</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2698">Facial Reconstructive Surgery</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Reconstructive procedures on the face are individualized to the patient&#x2019;s needs and desired outcomes. They are performed to repair deformities or restore normal function. They may vary from closure of small defects to complicated procedures involving implantation of prosthetic devices to conceal a large defect or reconstruct a lost part of the face (e.g., nose, ear, jaw). Each surgical procedure is customized and involves a variety of incisions, flaps, and grafts. Multiple surgical procedures may be required.</p>
<p class="indent">The process of facial reconstruction is often slow and tedious. Because a person&#x2019;s facial appearance affects self-esteem so greatly, this type of reconstruction is often a very emotional experience for the patient.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2699">Rhytidectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Rhytidectomy (i.e., face-lift) is a surgical procedure that removes soft tissue folds and minimizes cutaneous wrinkles on the face. It is performed to create a more youthful appearance. Psychological preparation requires that the patient recognize the limitations of surgery and the fact that miraculous rejuvenation will not occur. The patient is informed that the face may appear bruised and swollen after the dressings are removed and that several weeks may pass before the edema subsides. Corticosteroids (e.g., methylprednisolone) and vitamin C are prescribed postoperatively to minimize edema. Prophylactic antibiotic agents such as cephalexin may also be prescribed postoperatively (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4000">Neligan, Warren, &#x0026; Van Beek, 2017</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>