<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2660">Bullous Pemphigoid</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Bullous pemphigoid is a chronic disease that is characterized by periodic flare-up and remission. If untreated, it may be fatal. It is most commonly seen in older adults, with a peak incidence at about 65 years of age. There is no gender or racial predilection, and the disease can be found throughout the world (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Chan, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2661">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Bullous pemphigoid is characterized most commonly by the general appearance of tense bullae that have a particular tendency to appear on the flexor surfaces of the arms. When the blisters break, the skin has shallow erosions that heal fairly <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1847" title="1847"></span>quickly. Pruritus can be intense, even before the appearance of the blisters (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Chan, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Immunofluorescent studies of skin biopsy specimens from patients with bullous pemphigoid reveal depositions of IgG and complement C3 at the junction of the dermis and epidermis (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Chan, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2662">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Medical treatment includes topical corticosteroids for localized eruptions and systemic anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressant medications for widespread involvement. Systemic corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone) may be continued for months, in alternative-day doses. The patient needs to understand the implications of long-term corticosteroid therapy (see <a href="c45.xhtml">Chapter 45</a>). Tetracycline may be prescribed, although not for its antimicrobial effectiveness but because its anti-inflammatory properties are believed to be particularly efficacious in treating this disorder. Alternative medications may include immunosuppressive agents (e.g., azathioprine) or monoclonal antibodies (e.g., rituximab). Most patients will achieve remission, although this may require from 6 to 60 months of treatment (<a href="c56-sec32.xhtml#bib4104">Chan, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>