<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2813">Uveitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Uveitis, or inflammation of the uveal tract, can affect the iris, the ciliary body, or the choroid. There are two types of uveitis: nongranulomatous and granulomatous.</p>
<p class="indent">The more common form of uveitis is the nongranulomatous type, which manifests as an acute condition with pain, photophobia, and a pattern of conjunctival injection, especially around the cornea. The pupil is small or irregular, and vision is blurred. There may be small, fine precipitates on the posterior corneal surface and cells in the aqueous humor (i.e., cell and flare). If the uveitis is severe, a <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;hypopyon:&lt;/b&gt; collection of inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber of the eye">hypopyon</button></strong> (accumulation of inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber of the eye) may develop. The condition may be unilateral or bilateral and may be recurrent. Repeated attacks of nongranulomatous anterior uveitis can cause anterior synechiae (peripheral iris adheres to the cornea and impedes outflow of aqueous humor). Posterior synechiae (adherence of the iris and lens) block aqueous outflow from the posterior chamber. Secondary glaucoma can result from either anterior or posterior synechiae. Cataracts may also occur as a sequela to uveitis.</p>
<p class="indent">Granulomatous uveitis can have a more insidious onset and can involve any portion of the uveal tract. It tends to be chronic. Symptoms such as photophobia and pain may be minimal. Vision is markedly and adversely affected. Conjunctival injection is diffuse, and there may be vitreous clouding. In a severe posterior uveitis, such as chorioretinitis, there may be retinal and choroidal hemorrhages.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2814">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because photophobia is a common symptom, patients should wear dark glasses outdoors. Ciliary spasm and synechia are best avoided through mydriasis; cyclopentolate and atropine are commonly used. Local corticosteroid drops instilled four to six times a day are also used to decrease inflammation.</p>
<p class="indent">If the uveitis is recurrent, a careful history should be initiated to discover any underlying causes. This evaluation should include a complete history, physical examination, and diagnostic tests, including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibodies, and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and Lyme disease titers. Underlying causes include autoimmune disorders such as ankylosing spondylitis and sarcoidosis as well as toxoplasmosis, herpes zoster virus, ocular candidiasis, histoplasmosis, herpes simplex virus, tuberculosis, and syphilis.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>