<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2744">OCULAR MEDICATION ADMINISTRATION</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Because medications are often prescribed to treat ocular disorders, nurses must understand the actions of the commonly used medications and effective administration. The main objective of ocular medication delivery is to maximize the amount of medication that reaches the ocular site of action in sufficient concentration to produce a beneficial therapeutic effect. This is determined by the dynamics of ocular pharmacokinetics: absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion.</p>
<p class="indent">Ocular absorption involves the entry of a medication into the aqueous humor through the different routes of ocular medication administration. The rate and extent of aqueous humor absorption are determined by the characteristics of the medication and the anatomy and physiology of the eye. Natural barriers of absorption that diminish the efficacy of ocular medications include the following:</p>
<ul class="bull56"><li><em>Limited size of the conjunctival sac.</em> The conjunctival sac can hold only 50 mcL, and any excess is wasted. The volume of one eye drop from commercial topical ocular solutions typically ranges from 20 to 35 mcL.</li>
<li><em>Corneal membrane barriers.</em> The epithelial, stromal, and endothelial layers are barriers to absorption.</li>
<li><em>Blood&#x2013;ocular barriers.</em> Blood&#x2013;ocular barriers prevent high ocular tissue concentration of most ophthalmic medications because they separate the bloodstream from the ocular tissues and keep foreign substances from entering the eye, thereby limiting a medication&#x2019;s efficacy.</li>
<li><em>Tearing, blinking, and drainage.</em> Increased tear production and drainage due to ocular irritation or an ocular condition may dilute or wash out an instilled eye drop; blinking expels an instilled eye drop from the conjunctival sac.</li>
</ul>
<p class="indent">Distribution of an ocular medication into the ocular tissues varies by tissue type&#x2014;the conjunctiva, cornea, lens, iris, ciliary body, and choroids absorb medications to varying degrees. Medications penetrate the corneal epithelium either by intracellular diffusion (passing through the cells) or by intercellular diffusion (passing between the cells). Hydrophilic (water soluble) medications diffuse through the intracellular route, and lipophilic (fat soluble) medications diffuse through the intercellular route. Topical administration usually does not reach the retina in significant concentrations. Because the space between the ciliary process and the lens is small, medication diffusion in the vitreous is slow. When high concentrations of medication in the vitreous are required, intraocular injection is often chosen to bypass the natural ocular anatomic and physiologic barriers (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4161">American Society of Ophthalmic Registered Nurses [ASORN], 2013</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Aqueous solutions are most commonly used for the eye. They are the least expensive medications and interfere the least with vision. However, corneal contact time is brief because tears dilute the medication. Ophthalmic ointments have extended retention time in the conjunctival sac and provide a higher concentration than eye drops. The major disadvantage of ointments is the blurred vision that results after application. In general, eyelids and eyelid margins are best treated with ointments. The conjunctiva, limbus, cornea, and anterior chamber are treated most effectively with instilled solutions or suspensions. Subconjunctival injection may be necessary for better absorption in the anterior chamber. If high medication concentrations are required in the posterior chamber, intravitreal injections or systemically absorbed medications are considered. Contact lenses and collagen shields soaked in antibiotic agents are alternative delivery methods for treating corneal infections.</p>
<p class="indent">Of all these delivery methods, the topical route of administration&#x2014;instilled eye drops and applied ointments&#x2014;remains the most common and widely recommended (ASORN, 2013). Topical instillation, which is the least invasive method, permits self-administration of medication and produces fewer side effects.</p>
<p class="indent">Preservatives are commonly used in ocular medications. Benzalkonium chloride, for example, prevents the growth of organisms and enhances the corneal permeability of most <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1908" title="1908"></span>medications; however, some patients are allergic to this preservative. This may be suspected even if the patient had never before experienced an allergic reaction to systemic use of the medication in question. Eye drops without preservatives can be prepared by pharmacists.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>