<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2795">Orbital and Ocular Trauma</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Whether affecting the eye or the orbit, trauma to the eye and surrounding structures may have devastating consequences for vision. It is preferable to prevent injury rather than treat it. <a href="c58-sec16.xhtml#ct58-11">Chart 58-11</a> details measures to prevent eye injuries.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2796">Orbital Trauma</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Injury to the orbit is usually associated with a head injury; hence, the patient&#x2019;s general medical condition must first be stabilized before conducting an ocular examination (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). Only then is the globe assessed for soft tissue injury. During inspection, the face is meticulously assessed for underlying fractures, which should always be suspected in cases of blunt trauma. To establish the extent of ocular injury, visual acuity is assessed as soon as possible, even if it is only a rough estimate. Soft tissue orbital injuries often result in damage to the optic nerve. Major ocular injuries indicated by a soft globe, prolapsing tissue, ruptured globe, and hemorrhage require immediate surgical attention.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2797">Soft Tissue Injury and Hemorrhage</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The signs and symptoms of soft tissue injury from blunt or penetrating trauma include tenderness, ecchymosis, lid swelling, <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;exophthalmos:&lt;/b&gt; abnormal protrusion of one or both eyeballs">exophthalmos</button></strong> (abnormal protrusion of the eyeball), and hemorrhage. Closed injuries lead to contusions with <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1924" title="1924"></span>subconjunctival hemorrhage, commonly known as a black eye. Blood accumulates in the tissues of the conjunctiva. Hemorrhage may be caused by a soft tissue injury to the eyelid or by an underlying fracture.</p>
<p class="indent">Management of soft tissue hemorrhage that does not threaten vision is usually conservative and consists of thorough inspection, cleansing, and repair of wounds. Cold compresses are used in the early phase, followed by warm compresses. Hematomas that appear as swollen, fluctuating areas may be surgically drained or aspirated; if they are causing significant orbital pressure, they may be surgically evacuated.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2798">Orbital Fractures</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Orbital fractures are detected by facial x-rays. Depending on the orbital structures involved, orbital fractures can be classified as blowout, zygomatic or tripod, maxillary, midfacial, orbital apex, and orbital roof fractures. Blowout fractures result from compression of soft tissue and the sudden increase in orbital pressure when the force is transmitted to the orbital floor, which is the area of least resistance (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">McQuillan &#x0026; Makic, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles, with their fat and fascial attachments, or the nerve that courses along the inferior oblique muscle may become entrapped, resulting in enophthalmos (inward displacement of the globe). Computed tomography (CT) scanning can identify the muscle and its auxiliary structures that are entrapped. These fractures are usually caused by the blunt force from a fist or baseball (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">McQuillan &#x0026; Makic, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Orbital roof fractures are dangerous because of potential complications to the brain. Surgical management of these fractures requires a neurosurgeon and an ophthalmologist. The most common indications for surgical intervention are displacement of bone fragments disfiguring the normal facial contours, interference with normal binocular vision caused by extraocular muscle entrapment, interference with mastication in zygomatic fracture, and obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct. Surgery is usually nonemergent, and a period of 10 to 14 days gives the ophthalmologist time to assess ocular function, especially the extraocular muscles and the nasolacrimal duct. Emergency surgical repair is usually not performed unless the globe is displaced into the maxillary sinus. Surgical repair is primarily directed at freeing the entrapped ocular structures and restoring the integrity of the orbital floor.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2799">Foreign Bodies</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Foreign bodies that enter the orbit are usually tolerated, except for steel, copper, iron, and vegetable materials such as those from plants or trees, which may cause purulent infection. X-rays and CT scans are used to identify the foreign body. A careful history is important, especially if the foreign body has been in the orbit for a period of time and the incident forgotten. It is important to identify metallic foreign bodies because they prohibit the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as a diagnostic tool.</p>
<p class="indent">After the extent of the orbital damage is assessed, the decision to use conservative treatment or surgical removal is made. In general, orbital foreign bodies are removed if they are superficial and anterior in location; have sharp edges that may affect adjacent orbital structures; or are composed of copper, iron, or vegetable material. Surgical intervention is directed at preventing further ocular injury and maintaining the integrity of the affected areas. Cultures are usually obtained, and the patient is placed on prophylactic IV antibiotic medications that are later changed to an oral route.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>