<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2788">Retinal Vascular Disorders</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Loss of vision can occur from occlusion of a retinal artery or vein. Such occlusions may result from atherosclerosis, valvular heart disease, venous stasis, hypertension, or increased blood viscosity. Associated risk factors include diabetes, glaucoma, and aging.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2789">Central Retinal Vein Occlusion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Blood supply to and from the ocular fundus is provided by the central retinal artery and vein. Central retinal vein occlusions (CRVOs) are found most often in people older than 50&#x00A0;years. Patients who suffer a CRVO report decreased visual acuity ranging from mild blurring to severely limited.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1921</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1922" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1922">p. 1922</span></div>
<p class="indent">Direct ophthalmoscopy of the retina shows optic disc swelling, venous dilation and tortuousness, retinal hemorrhages, cotton-wool spots, and a bloody appearance of the retina. The better the initial visual acuity, the better is the general prognosis.</p>
<p class="indent">Fluorescein angiography may show extensive areas of capillary closure. The patient should be monitored carefully over the ensuing several months for signs of neovascularization and neovascular glaucoma. Laser panretinal photocoagulation may be necessary to treat the abnormal neovascularization. Neovascularization of the iris may cause neovascular glaucoma. Macular edema, macular nonperfusion, and vitreous hemorrhage from the neovascularization are among the potential complications of CRVO (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4195">Schmidt-Erfurth, Garcia-Arumi, Gerendas, et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2790">Branch Retinal Vein Occlusion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Some patients with branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) are symptom free, whereas others complain of a sudden loss of vision if the macular area is involved. A more gradual loss of vision may occur if macular edema associated with BRVO develops.</p>
<p class="indent">On examination, the ocular fundus appears similar to that found in CRVO. The occlusions generally occur at the arteriovenous crossings. The diagnostic evaluation and follow-up assessments and complications are the same as for CRVO. Associated conditions include glaucoma, systemic hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Schmidt-Erfurth et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2791">Central Retinal Artery Occlusion</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients with central retinal artery occlusion, a relatively rare disorder that accounts for approximately 1 in 10,000 ophthalmologic visits, present with a sudden loss of vision. Visual acuity is reduced to being able to count the examiner&#x2019;s fingers, or the field of vision is tremendously restricted. A relative afferent pupillary defect is present. Examination of the ocular fundus reveals a pale retina with a cherry-red spot at the fovea. The retinal arteries are thin, and emboli are occasionally seen in the central retinal artery or its branches. Central retinal artery occlusion is a true ocular emergency. Various treatments may include ocular massage, anterior chamber paracentesis, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, topical ocular hypotensive agents, anticoagulation, and intravenous mannitol and acetazolamide. An aggressive stepwise approach may be beneficial, depending on the underlying cause of the occlusion and the amount of time from onset of occlusion to treatment. Most visual loss associated with central retinal artery occlusion is severe and permanent (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Schmidt-Erfurth et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>