<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2768">CORNEAL DISORDERS</h4>
<h4 class="h4" id="s2769">Corneal Dystrophies</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Corneal dystrophies are inherited as autosomal dominant traits and manifest when the person is about 20 years of age. They are characterized by deposits in the corneal layers. Decreased vision is caused by the irregular corneal surface and corneal deposits. Corneal endothelial decomposition leads to corneal edema and blurring of vision. Persistent edema leads to bullous keratopathy or the formation of blisters that cause pain and discomfort on rupturing. The two main types are keratoconus and Fuchs endothelial dystrophy.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2770">Keratoconus</h5>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;keratoconus:&lt;/b&gt; cone-shaped deformity of the cornea">Keratoconus</button></strong>, the most common type of corneal dystrophy, is characterized by a conical protuberance of the cornea with progressive thinning on protrusion and irregular astigmatism. This hereditary condition has a higher incidence among women. Onset occurs at puberty; the condition may progress for more than 20 years and is bilateral. Corneal scarring occurs in severe cases. Blurred vision is a prominent symptom. Rigid, gas-permeable contact lenses correct irregular astigmatism and improve vision. Advances in contact lens design have reduced the need for surgery. Penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) is indicated when contact lens correction is no longer effective (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Allard &#x0026; Zetterberg, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2771">Fuchs Endothelial Dystrophy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Fuchs (pronounced <em>Fooks</em>) dystrophy is manifested by a slow death of cells in the endothelial cornea. It affects women more than men and is usually not noted until 50 years of age. Corneal endothelial cell death leads to corneal edema and blurring of vision. Persistent edema leads to bullous keratopathy. A bandage contact lens is used to flatten the bullae, protect the exposed corneal nerve endings, and relieve discomfort. Symptomatic treatments, such as hypertonic drops or ointment (5% sodium chloride), may reduce epithelial edema. Currently, the only cure is a corneal transplant (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Moshirfar, Ding, &#x0026; Shah, 2018</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>