<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2804">Dry Eyes</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Dry eyes can be caused by decreased tear production or increased tear evaporation, which can be episodic or chronic (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Norris, 2019</a>). Decreased tear production (aqueous deficiency) can be caused by systemic disease (Sj&#x00F6;gren, connective tissue disease), lacrimal gland obstruction, and systemic drugs (e.g., diuretics, antihistamines, psychotropic drugs). Increased tear evaporation (evaporative dry eye) can be caused by meibomian gland deficiency, lid aperture disorder, vitamin A deficiency, reduced lid blinking rate, preservatives from topical drugs, ocular surface disease (allergy), and contact lens wear. Risk factors include increasing age, smoking, recent refractive surgery, and postmenopausal status (in women). An increase in the intake of omega-3 fatty acids may be beneficial in reducing the risk (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2805">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most common complaints are photophobia, foreign-body sensation, burning and stinging, redness, and decreased tearing.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2806">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Chronic dry eyes may result in chronic conjunctival and corneal irritation that can lead to corneal erosion, scarring, ulceration, thinning, or perforation that can seriously threaten vision. Secondary bacterial infection can occur.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2807">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management of dry eyes requires the cooperation of the patient with a regimen that needs to be followed at home for a long period; otherwise, complete relief of symptoms is unlikely. Instillation of artificial tears during the day and an ointment at night is the usual regimen to hydrate and lubricate the eye and preserve a moist ocular surface. Cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion is an effective agent that increases tear production and is used once daily. Anti-inflammatory medications are also used, and moisture chambers (e.g., moisture chamber spectacles, swim goggles) may provide additional relief.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients may become hypersensitive to chemical preservatives such as benzalkonium chloride and thimerosal. For these patients, preservative-free ophthalmic solutions are used. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1927" title="1927"></span>Management of dry eyes also includes the concurrent treatment of infections, such as chronic blepharitis and acne rosacea, and treating the underlying systemic disease, such as Sj&#x00F6;gren syndrome (an autoimmune disease).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt58-7">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;58-7</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Select Infections and Inflammatory Disorders of Eye Structures</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Disorder</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Description</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Management</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Hordeolum (stye)</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Acute suppurative infection of the glands of the eyelids caused by <em>Staphylococcus aureus.</em> The lid is red and edematous with a small collection of pus in the form of an abscess. There is considerable discomfort.</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Warm compresses are applied directly to the affected lid area three to four times a day for 10&#x2013;15 min. If the condition is not improved after 48 h, incision and drainage may be indicated. Application of topical antibiotics may be prescribed thereafter.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Chalazion</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Sterile inflammatory process involving chronic granulomatous inflammation of the meibomian glands; can appear as a single granuloma or multiple granulomas in the upper or lower eyelids.</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Warm compresses applied three to four times a day for 10&#x2013;15 min may resolve the inflammation in the early stages. Most often, however, surgical excision is indicated. Corticosteroid injection to the chalazion lesion may be used for smaller lesions.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Blepharitis</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Chronic bilateral inflammation of the eyelid margins. There are two types: staphylococcal and seborrheic. Staphylococcal blepharitis is usually ulcerative and is more serious due to the involvement of the base of hair follicles. Permanent scarring can result.</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">The seborrheic type is chronic and is usually resistant to treatment, but the milder cases may respond to lid hygiene. Staphylococcal blepharitis requires topical antibiotic treatment. Instructions on lid hygiene (to keep the lid margins clean and free of exudates) are given to the patient.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Bacterial keratitis</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Infection of the cornea by <em>S. aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae,</em> and <em>Pseudomonas aeruginosa.</em></p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Fortified (high-concentration) antibiotic eye drops are given every 30 min around the clock for the first few days, then every 1&#x2013;2 h. Systemic antibiotics may be given. Cycloplegics are given to reduce pain caused by ciliary spasm.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Herpes simplex keratitis</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Symptoms are severe pain, tearing, and photophobia. The dendritic ulcer has a branching, linear pattern with feathery edges and terminal bulbs at its ends. Herpes simplex keratitis can lead to recurrent stromal keratitis and persist to 12 mo with residual corneal scarring.</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Many lesions heal without treatment and residual effects. The treatment goal is to minimize the damaging effect of the inflammatory response and eliminate viral replication within the cornea. Penetrating keratoplasty is indicated for corneal scarring and must be performed when the herpetic disease has been inactive for many months.</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Shaw, M., &#x0026; Lee, A. (2017). <em>Ophthalmic nursing</em> (5th ed.). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press Taylor &#x0026; Francis Group.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Surgical treatment includes punctal occlusion, grafting procedures, and lateral tarsorrhaphy (uniting the edges of the lids). Punctal plugs are made of silicone material for the temporary or permanent occlusion of the puncta. These help to preserve the volume of natural tears and prolong the effects of artificial tears (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>