<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2833">Cytomegalovirus Retinitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Many ophthalmic complications have been associated with AIDS, and CMV is the most common cause of retinal inflammation in patients with AIDS. Early symptoms of CMV retinitis vary from patient to patient. Some patients complain of floaters or a decrease in peripheral vision. Some have a paracentral or central scotoma, whereas others have fluctuations in vision from macular edema. The retina often becomes thin and atrophic and susceptible to retinal tears and breaks.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1932</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1933" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1933">p. 1933</span></div>
<p class="indent">CMV retinitis generally takes one of three forms: hemorrhagic, brushfire, or granular. In the hemorrhagic type, large areas of white, necrotic retina may be associated with retinal hemorrhage. In the brushfire type, a yellow-white margin begins at the edge of burned-out atrophic retina. This retinitis expands and, if untreated, involves the entire retina. In the granular type, white granular lesions in the periphery of the retina gradually expand. The white, feathery infiltration of the retina destroys sensory retina and leads to necrosis, optic atrophy, and retinal detachment.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2834">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management of CMV retinitis consists of prescribing the appropriate pharmacologic agent.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Pharmacologic Therapy</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Pharmacologic agents available for the treatment of CMV retinitis include ganciclovir, foscarnet, and cidofovir.</p>
<p class="indent">Ganciclovir is administered IV, orally, or intravitreously in the acute stage of CMV retinitis. The intravitreous form is available as a 4-mm intraocular implant or insert containing the medication embedded in a polymer-based system that slowly releases the medication. The insert is surgically placed in the posterior segment of the eye, and the medication diffuses locally to the site of the infection over a period of 5 to 8 months before the insert must be replaced. When given systemically, ganciclovir is a very potent medication; it can cause neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and elevated serum creatinine levels. The surgically implanted sustained-release insert enables higher concentrations of ganciclovir to reach the CMV retinitis, but there are risks and complications associated with the inserts, including endophthalmitis, retinal detachment, and hypotony.</p>
<p class="indent">Foscarnet inhibits viral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) replication. It may be the medication of choice when ganciclovir is ineffective. It may be administered by IV or intravitreal injections. The combination of foscarnet and ganciclovir has been more effective than either medication alone. Nephrotoxicity may occur with systemic foscarnet, and renal function must be monitored carefully.</p>
<p class="indent">Cidofovir impedes CMV replication and is administered IV. Cidofovir has been shown to delay the progression of CMV retinitis significantly. Nephrotoxicity, proteinuria, and increased serum creatinine levels are significant side effects.</p>
<p class="indent">A nucleoside analogue such as zidovudine given in combination with one or more protease inhibitors such as ritonavir in the management of patients with AIDS has led to a major therapeutic success, gradually altering the course of the disease and transforming HIV/AIDS into a chronically manageable disease (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Iacob, Iacob, &#x0026; Jugulete, 2017</a>). The immune system can then recover to a functional level. Some patients develop immune recovery uveitis, characterized by intraocular inflammation, cystoid macular edema, and the formation of epiretinal membranes. Immune recovery uveitis is managed by corticosteroids or by injection of corticosteroids into the sub-Tenon area of the eye.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>