<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2724">Diagnostic Evaluation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A wide range of diagnostic studies may be performed in patients with eye disorders. The nurse should educate the patient about the purpose, what to expect, and any possible side effects related to these examinations prior to testing. The nurse should be aware of contraindications, potential complications, and trends in results. Trends provide information about disease progression as well as the patient&#x2019;s response to therapy.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2725">Direct Ophthalmoscopy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A direct ophthalmoscope is a handheld instrument with various plus and minus lenses (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Weber &#x0026; Kelley, 2018</a>). The lenses can be rotated into place, enabling the examiner to bring the cornea, lens, and retina into focus sequentially. The examiner holds the ophthalmoscope in the right hand and uses the right eye to examine the patient&#x2019;s right eye. The examiner switches to the left hand and left eye when examining the patient&#x2019;s left eye. During this examination, the room should be darkened, and the patient&#x2019;s eye should be on the same level as the examiner&#x2019;s eye. The patient and the examiner should be comfortable, and both should breathe normally. The patient is given a target to gaze at and is encouraged to keep both eyes open and steady.</p>
<p class="indent">When the fundus is examined, the vasculature comes into focus first. The veins are larger in diameter than the arteries. The examiner focuses on a large vessel and then follows it toward the midline of the body, which leads to the optic nerve. The central depression in the disc is known as the cup. The normal cup is about one third the size of the diameter of the disc. The size of the physiologic optic cup should be estimated, and the disc margins described as sharp or blurred. A silvery or coppery appearance, which indicates arteriolosclerosis, should be noted. The periphery of the retina is examined by having the patient shift their gaze. The last area of the fundus to be examined is the macula, because this area is the most sensitive to light. The retina of a young person often has a glistening effect, sometimes referred to as a cellophane reflex.</p>
<p class="indent">The healthy fundus should be free of any lesions. The examiner looks for intraretinal hemorrhages, which may appear as red smudges, and, if the patient has hypertension, they may be somewhat flame shaped. Lipid with a yellowish appearance may be present in the retina of patients with hypercholesterolemia or diabetes. Soft exudates that have a fuzzy, white appearance (cotton-wool spots) should be noted. The examiner looks for microaneurysms, which look like little red dots, and nevi. Drusen (small, hyaline, globular deposits), commonly found in macular degeneration, appear as yellowish areas with indistinct edges. Small drusen have a more distinct edge. The examiner should sketch the fundus and document any abnormalities.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2726">Indirect Ophthalmoscopy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The indirect ophthalmoscope is an instrument commonly used by the ophthalmologist to see larger areas of the retina, although in an unmagnified state. It produces a bright and intense light. The light source is affixed with a pair of binocular lenses mounted on the examiner&#x2019;s head. The ophthalmoscope is used with a handheld, 20-diopter lens.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2727">Slit-Lamp Examination</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The slit lamp is a binocular microscope mounted on a table. This instrument enables the user to examine the eye with magnification of 10 to 40 times the real image. The illumination can be varied from a broad to a narrow beam of light for different parts of the eye. For example, by varying the width and intensity of the light, the anterior chamber can be examined for signs of inflammation. Cataracts may be evaluated by changing the angle of the light. When a handheld contact lens, such as a three-mirror lens, is used with the slit lamp, the angle of the anterior chamber may be examined, as may the ocular fundus.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2728">Tonometry</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Tonometry is a common procedure to measure IOP. The device used for measuring IOP is an accurately calibrated applanation tonometer, which measures the pressure needed to flatten the cornea. This procedure is most commonly used to screen for and monitor IOP in glaucoma.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1901</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1902" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1902">p. 1902</span></div>
<h6 class="h6">Nursing Interventions</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Providing patient education prior to tonometry helps avoid possible errors in IOP measurement. Patients are cautioned to avoid squeezing the eyelids, holding their breath, or performing a Valsalva maneuver, because these may result in abnormally increased IOP.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2729">Color Vision Testing</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The ability to differentiate colors has a dramatic effect on the activities of daily living (ADLs). For example, the inability to differentiate between red and green can compromise traffic safety. Some careers (e.g., commercial artist, [color] photographer, airline pilot, electrician) may be closed to people with significant color deficiencies. The photoreceptor cells responsible for color vision are the cones, and the greatest area of color sensitivity is in the macula&#x2014;the area of densest cone concentration.</p>
<p class="indent">A screening test, such as the polychromatic plates discussed in the next paragraph, can be used to establish whether a person&#x2019;s color vision is within normal range. Color vision deficits can be inherited. For example, red&#x2013;green color deficiencies are inherited in an X-linked manner, affecting approximately 8% of men and 0.5% of women (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4178">Colour Blind Awareness, 2019</a>). Acquired color vision losses may be caused by medications (e.g., digitalis) or pathology (e.g., cataracts). A simple test, such as asking a patient if the red top on a bottle of eye drops appears redder to one eye than the other, can be an effective tool. A difference in the perception of the intensity of the color red between the two eyes can be a symptom of a neurologic problem and may provide information about the location of the lesion.</p>
<p class="indent">Because alteration in color vision sometimes indicates conditions of the optic nerve, color vision testing is often performed in a neuro-ophthalmologic workup. The most common color vision test is performed using Ishihara polychromatic plates. These plates are bound together in a booklet. On each plate of this booklet are dots of primary colors that are integrated into a background of secondary colors. The dots are arranged in simple patterns, such as numbers or geometric shapes. Patients with diminished color vision may be unable to identify the hidden shapes. Patients with central vision conditions (e.g., macular degeneration) have more difficulty identifying colors than those with peripheral vision conditions (e.g., glaucoma) because central vision identifies color.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2730">Amsler Grid</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The Amsler grid is a test often used for patients with macular problems, such as macular degeneration. It consists of a geometric grid of identical squares with a central fixation point. The grid should be viewed by the patient wearing normal reading glasses. Each eye is tested separately. The patient is instructed to stare at the central fixation spot on the grid and report any distortion in the squares of the grid itself. For patients with macular disorders, some of the squares may look faded, or the lines may be wavy. Patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are commonly given these Amsler grids to take home. The patient is encouraged to check the grids frequently, as often as daily, to monitor macular function for early detection of changes requiring immediate attention (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Gerstenblith &#x0026; Rabinowitz, 2017</a>; <a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Weber &#x0026; Kelley, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2731">Ultrasonography</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Lesions in the globe or the orbit may not be directly visible and are evaluated by ultrasonography. Ultrasonography is a valuable diagnostic technique, especially when the view of the retina is obscured by opaque media such as cataract or hemorrhage. An ultrasonography B-scan identifies pathology such as orbital tumors, retinal detachment, and vitreous hemorrhage. Ultrasonography A-scans are used to measure the axial length for implants prior to cataract surgery (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Gerstenblith &#x0026; Rabinowitz, 2017</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2732">Optical Coherence Tomography</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Optical coherence tomography is a technology that involves low-coherence interferometry (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Gerstenblith &#x0026; Rabinowitz, 2017</a>). Light is used to evaluate retinal and macular diseases as well as anterior segment conditions. This method is noninvasive and involves no physical contact with the eye.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2733">Fundus Photography</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Fundus photography is used to detect and document retinal lesions. The patient&#x2019;s pupils are usually widely dilated before the procedure. The resulting fundus photographs can be viewed stereoscopically so that elevations such as macular edema can be identified.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2734">Laser Scanning</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Various scanning techniques use laser light in the diagnostic evaluation of eye disorders. Confocal laser scanning ophthalmoscopy provides a three-dimensional image of the optic nerve topography and is used alone or in conjunction with fundus photography to provide comparative data for suspected optic nerve disease such as glaucoma and <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;papilledema:&lt;/b&gt; swelling of the optic disc usually due to increased intracranial pressure">papilledema</button></strong> (swelling of the optic disc due to increased intracranial pressure) (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Gerstenblith &#x0026; Rabinowitz, 2017</a>). Laser scanning polarimetry is used to measure nerve fiber layer thickness and is an important indicator of glaucoma progression.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2735">Angiography</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Angiography is done using fluorescein or indocyanine green as contrast agents. Fluorescein angiography is used to evaluate clinically significant macular edema, document macular capillary nonperfusion, and identify retinal and choroidal <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;neovascularization:&lt;/b&gt; growth of abnormal new blood vessels">neovascularization</button></strong> (growth of abnormal new blood vessels) in AMD. It is an invasive procedure in which fluorescein dye is injected, usually into an antecubital vein. Within 10 to 15 seconds, this dye can be seen coursing through the retinal vessels. Over a 10-minute period, serial black-and-white photographs are taken of the retinal vasculature (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Fischbach &#x0026; Fischbach, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Indocyanine green angiography is used to evaluate abnormalities in the choroidal vasculature, which often are seen in macular degeneration. Indocyanine green dye is injected intravenously (IV), and multiple images are captured using digital video angiography. The dye is quickly removed from circulation by the liver, mostly clearing within 10 to 20 minutes (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4190">Norat, Soldozy, Elsarrag, et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Nursing Interventions</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Prior to the angiography, the patient&#x2019;s blood urea nitrogen and creatinine should be checked to ensure that the kidneys <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1903" title="1903"></span>will excrete the contrast agent (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Fischbach &#x0026; Fischbach, 2018</a>). The patient should be well hydrated, and clear liquids are usually permitted up to the time of the test. The patient is instructed to remain immobile during the angiogram process and is told to expect a brief feeling of warmth in the face, behind the eyes, or in the jaw, teeth, tongue, and lips, and a metallic taste when the contrast agent is injected.</p>
<p class="indent">Nursing care after angiography includes observation of the injection site (usually the antecubital vein) for bleeding or hematoma formation (a localized collection of blood). Fluorescein may impart a gold tone to the skin in some patients, and urine may turn deep yellow or orange. This discoloration usually disappears in 24 hours. Indocyanine green dye is generally well tolerated, but some patients experience nausea and vomiting. Allergic reactions are rare; however, indocyanine green angiography is contraindicated in patients with a history of iodide reactions. Fluids are encouraged following the procedure to facilitate excretion of the contrast agent (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4214">Fischbach &#x0026; Fischbach, 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2736">Perimetry Testing</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Perimetry testing evaluates the field of vision. Visual field testing (i.e., perimetry) helps identify which parts of the patient&#x2019;s central and peripheral visual fields have useful vision. It is most helpful in detecting central <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;scotomas:&lt;/b&gt; blind or partially blind areas in the visual field">scotomas</button></strong> (blind or partially blind areas in the visual field) in macular degeneration and the peripheral field defects in glaucoma and retinitis pigmentosa. Visual field evaluation and optic nerve assessment are major components of monitoring and detecting glaucoma progression.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>