<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2772">Corneal Surgeries</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Among the surgical procedures used to treat diseased corneal tissue are phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK), PKP and corneal endothelial transplantation, and Descemet&#x2019;s stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2773">Phototherapeutic Keratectomy</h5>
<p class="nonindent">PTK is a laser procedure that is used to treat diseased corneal tissue by removing or reducing corneal opacities and smoothing the anterior corneal surface to improve functional vision. PTK is contraindicated in patients with active herpetic keratitis because the ultraviolet rays may reactivate latent virus. Common side effects are induced hyperopia and stromal haze. Complications are delayed re-epithelialization (particularly in patients with diabetes) and bacterial keratitis. Postoperative management consists of oral analgesic agents for eye pain. Re-epithelialization is promoted with a pressure patch or therapeutic soft contact lens. Antibiotic and corticosteroid ointments and NSAIDs are prescribed postoperatively. Follow-up examinations are required for up to 2 years.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2774">Penetrating Keratoplasty</h5>
<p class="nonindent">PKP (corneal transplantation or corneal grafting) involves replacing abnormal host tissue with healthy donor (cadaver) corneal tissue. Common indications are keratoconus, corneal scarring from herpes simplex, keratitis, and chemical burns.</p>
<p class="indent">Several factors affect the success of the graft: the condition of the ocular structures (e.g., lids, conjunctiva), quality of the tears, adequacy of blinking, and viability of the donor endothelium. Contraindications for the use of donor tissue are outlined in <a href="#ct58-10">Chart 58-10</a>.</p>
<p class="indent">In PKP, the surgeon determines the graft size before the procedure, and the appropriate size is marked on the surface of the cornea. The surgeon prepares the donor cornea and the recipient bed, removes the diseased cornea, places the donor cornea on the recipient bed, and sutures it in place. Sutures remain in place for 12 to 18 months and are then removed. Potential complications include early graft failure due to poor quality of donor tissue, surgical trauma, acute infection, and persistently increased IOP and late graft failure due to rejection.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1918</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1919" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1919">p. 1919</span></div>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct58-10"><strong>Chart 58-10</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong><strong>Contraindications to the Use of Donor Tissue for Corneal Transplantation: Donor Characteristics</strong></strong></p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Systemic Disorders</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Death from unknown cause</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>History or suspected history of the following:</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Acquired immune deficiency syndrome or high risk for human immune deficiency virus infection</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Creutzfeldt&#x2013;Jakob disease</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Eye infection</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hepatitis</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Rabies</p>
<p class="BoxBL2Middle_a"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Systemic infection</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Intrinsic Eye Disease</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Disorders of the conjunctiva or corneal surface involving the optical zone of the cornea</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Malignant tumors of anterior segment</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Ocular inflammation</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Retinoblastoma</p>
<p class="BoxpTitlepH1"><strong>Other</strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Corneal scars</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>History of eye trauma</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Previous surgical eye procedures such as corneal graft or LASIK eye surgery</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Postoperatively, the patient receives mydriatics for 2 weeks and topical corticosteroids for 12 months (daily doses for 6 months and tapered doses thereafter). These mydriatics and corticosteroid drops should be preservative free to prevent a reactive inflammation. Patients typically describe a sensation of postoperative eye discomfort rather than acute pain.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2775">Additional Keratoplasty Surgeries</h5>
<p class="nonindent">For many years, PKP was the standard of care for patients with corneal endothelial failure but with poor refractive results. Subsequently, other techniques have been developed. Anterior lamellar keratoplasty (ALK) involves a partial-thickness graft for disorders such as anterior corneal dystrophies or scarring not involving the endothelial portion of the cornea. Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) involves replacement of only anterior corneal layers and not Descemet&#x2019;s membrane or endothelial layers for disorders such as keratoconus. Posterior lamellar keratoplasty (PLK or EK) and DSEK (which replaces only the endothelial layer of the cornea) are procedures indicated for conditions such as Fuchs endothelial dystrophy or bullous keratopathy (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4189">Moshirfar et&#x00A0;al., 2018</a>). In DSEK, layers of the cornea are dissected and selectively replaced by donor cornea tissue. DSEK offers several advantages, such as less postoperative astigmatism, faster visual recovery, and stronger wound integrity. Theoretically, the risk of rejection is less because less of the patient&#x2019;s tissue is replaced.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2776">Keratoprosthesis</h5>
<p class="nonindent">An additional therapeutic option for patients with multiple graft failures or severe corneal disease is keratoprosthesis (artificial cornea; e.g., U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA]-approved Boston Keratoprosthesis [KPro] and AlphaCor). The design of the keratoprosthesis consists of a central optic core and an outer rim that secures the prosthesis. This procedure has serious potential complications (e.g., glaucoma, endophthalmitis) and requires close follow-up and monitoring (<a href="c58-sec35.xhtml#bib4197">Shalaby Bardan, Al Raqqad, Zarei-Ghanavati, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2777">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">For corneal surgeries, the nurse reinforces instructions regarding visual rehabilitation and visual improvement. A technically successful graft may initially produce disappointing results because the procedure has produced a new optical surface. Only after several months do patients start seeing the natural and true colors of their environment. Correction of a resultant refractive error with eyeglasses or contact lenses determines the final visual outcome. The nurse assesses the patient&#x2019;s support system and their ability to comply with long-term follow-up, which includes frequent clinic visits for several months for tapering of topical corticosteroid therapy, selective suture removal, and ongoing evaluation of the graft site and visual acuity. The nurse also initiates appropriate referrals to community services as indicated.</p>
<p class="indent">Because graft failure is an ophthalmic emergency that can occur at any time, the primary goal of nursing care is to educate the patient to identify signs and symptoms of graft failure. The early symptoms are blurred vision, discomfort, tearing, or redness of the eye. Decreased vision results after graft destruction. The patient must contact the ophthalmologist as soon as symptoms occur. Treatment of graft rejection usually involves prompt administration of hourly topical corticosteroids and periocular corticosteroid injections. Systemic immunosuppressive agents may be necessary for severe, resistant cases.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>