<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2866">External Otitis (Otitis Externa)</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;external otitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of the external auditory canal (&lt;em&gt;synonym:&lt;/em&gt; otitis externa)">External otitis</button></strong> (i.e., otitis externa) refers to an inflammation of the external auditory canal. Causes include water in the ear canal (swimmer&#x2019;s ear); trauma to the skin of the ear canal, permitting entrance of organisms into the tissues; and systemic conditions, such as vitamin deficiency and endocrine disorders. Bacterial or fungal infections are most frequently encountered. The most common bacterial pathogens associated with external otitis are <em>Staphylococcus aureus</em> and <em>Pseudomonas</em> species. The most common fungus isolated in both normal and infected ears is <em>Aspergillus</em> (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Norris, 2019</a>). External otitis is often caused by a dermatosis such as psoriasis, eczema, or seborrheic dermatitis. Even allergic reactions to hair spray, hair dye, and permanent wave lotions can cause dermatitis, which clears when the offending agent is removed.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2867">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Patients usually report pain; discharge from the external auditory canal; aural tenderness (usually not present in middle ear infections); and occasionally fever, cellulitis, and lymphadenopathy. Other symptoms may include pruritus and hearing loss or a feeling of fullness in the ear. On otoscopic examination, the ear canal is erythematous and edematous. Discharge may be yellow or green and foul smelling. In fungal infections, hairlike black spores may be visible.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2868">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The principles of therapy are aimed at relieving the discomfort, reducing the swelling of the ear canal, and eradicating the infection. Patients may require analgesic medications for the first 48 to 96 hours. Treatment most often includes antimicrobial or antifungal otic medications given by dropper at room temperature. In bacterial infection, a combination antibiotic and corticosteroid agent may be used to soothe inflamed tissues (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2869">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Nurses should instruct patients not to clean the external auditory canal with cotton-tipped applicators and to avoid events that traumatize the external canal, such as scratching the canal with the fingernail or other objects. Trauma may lead to infection of the canal. Patients should also avoid getting the canal wet when swimming or shampooing the hair. A cotton ball or lamb&#x2019;s wool can be covered in a water-insoluble gel such as petrolatum jelly and placed in the ear as a barrier to the canal getting wet. Infection can be prevented by using antiseptic otic preparations after swimming (e.g., Swim-Ear, Ear Dry), unless there is a history of tympanic membrane perforation or a current ear infection (see <a href="c59-sec08.xhtml#ct59-6">Chart 59-6</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>