<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2875">Acute Otitis Media</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Ear infections can occur at any age; however, they are most commonly seen in children. <strong>Acute otitis media (AOM)</strong> is an acute infection of the middle ear, lasting less than 6 weeks. Pathogens that cause AOM are usually bacterial or viral and enter the middle ear after eustachian tube dysfunction caused by obstruction related to upper respiratory infections, inflammation of surrounding structures (e.g., rhinosinusitis, adenoid hypertrophy), or allergic reactions (e.g., allergic rhinitis) (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Norris, 2019</a>). Bacteria can enter the eustachian tube from contaminated secretions in the nasopharynx and the middle ear from a tympanic membrane perforation. A purulent exudate is usually present in the middle ear, resulting in a conductive hearing loss.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2876">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Symptoms of otitis media vary with the severity of the infection. The condition, usually unilateral in adults, may be accompanied by otalgia. The pain is relieved after spontaneous perforation or therapeutic incision of the tympanic membrane. Other symptoms may include drainage from the ear, fever, and hearing loss. <a href="#tt59-3">Table 59-3</a> differentiates acute otitis externa from AOM. Risk factors for AOM include younger age, chronic upper respiratory infections, medical conditions that predispose the patient to ear infections (e.g., Down syndrome, cystic fibrosis, cleft palate), and chronic exposure to secondhand cigarette smoke.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2877">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The outcome of AOM depends on the efficacy of therapy (the prescribed dose of an oral antibiotic and the duration of therapy), the virulence of the bacteria, and the physical status of the patient. With early and appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, otitis media may resolve with no serious sequelae. If drainage occurs, an antibiotic otic preparation is usually prescribed. The condition may become subacute (lasting 2 weeks to 3 months) with persistent purulent discharge from the ear. Rarely does permanent hearing loss occur. Secondary complications involving the mastoid and other serious intracranial complications, such as meningitis or brain abscess, although rare, can occur.</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt59-3">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;59-3</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Clinical Features of Otitis</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Feature</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Acute Otitis Externa</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Acute Otitis Media</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Otorrhea</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">May or may not be present</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Present if tympanic membrane perforates; discharge is profuse</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Otalgia</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Persistent; may awaken patient at night</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Relieved if tympanic membrane ruptures</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Aural tenderness</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Present on palpation of auricle</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Usually absent</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Systemic symptoms</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Absent</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Fever, upper respiratory infection, rhinitis</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Edema of external auditory canal</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Present</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Absent</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Tympanic membrane</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">May appear normal</p></td>
<td class="td56a"><p class="tbodyleft">Erythema, bulging, may be perforated</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Hearing loss</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Conductive type</p></td>
<td class="td56"><p class="tbodyleft">Conductive type</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Weber, J., &#x0026; Kelley, J. (2018). <em>Health assessment in nursing</em> (6th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.</p>
</div>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1948</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1949" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1949">p. 1949</span></div>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;myringotomy:&lt;/b&gt; incision in the tympanic membrane (&lt;em&gt;synonym:&lt;/em&gt; tympanotomy)">myringotomy</button></strong> (i.e., tympanotomy) is an incision in the tympanic membrane. The tympanic membrane is numbed with a local anesthetic agent such as phenol or by iontophoresis (i.e., in which electrical current flows through a lidocaine and epinephrine solution to numb the ear canal and tympanic membrane). The procedure is painless and takes less than 15 minutes. Under microscopic guidance, an incision is made through the tympanic membrane to relieve pressure and to drain serous or purulent fluid from the middle ear.</p>
<p class="indent">Normally, this procedure is unnecessary for treating AOM, but it may be performed if pain persists. Myringotomy also allows the drainage to be analyzed (by culture and sensitivity testing) so that the infecting organism can be identified and appropriate antibiotic therapy prescribed. The incision heals within 24 to 72 hours.</p>
<p class="indent">If AOM recurs and there is no contraindication, a ventilating, or pressure-equalizing, tube may be inserted. The ventilating tube, which temporarily takes the place of the eustachian tube in equalizing pressure, is retained for 6 to 18&#x00A0;months. The ventilating tube is then extruded with normal skin migration of the tympanic membrane, with the hole healing in nearly every case. Ventilating tubes are used to treat recurrent episodes of AOM.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>