<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2898">Labyrinthitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;labyrinthitis:&lt;/b&gt; inflammation of the labyrinth of the inner ear">Labyrinthitis</button></strong>, an inflammation of the labyrinth of the inner ear, can be bacterial or viral in origin. Bacterial labyrinthitis is rare because of antibiotic therapy, but it sometimes occurs as a complication of otitis media. The infection can spread to the inner ear by penetrating the membranes of the oval or round windows. Viral labyrinthitis is a common diagnosis, but little is known about this disorder, which affects hearing and balance. The most common viral causes are mumps, rubella, rubeola, and influenza. Viral illnesses of the upper respiratory tract and herpetiform disorders of the facial and acoustic nerves (i.e., Ramsay Hunt syndrome) also cause labyrinthitis.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct59-10"><strong>Chart 59-10</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong><strong>Select Ototoxic Substances</strong></strong></p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Aminoglycoside antibiotic agents</strong>: amikacin, gentamicin, kanamycin, netilmicin, neomycin, streptomycin, tobramycin</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Anti-inflammatory agents</strong>: salicylates (aspirin), indomethacin</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Antimalarial agents</strong>: quinine, chloroquine</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Chemicals</strong>: alcohol, arsenic</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Chemotherapeutic (antineoplastic) agents</strong>: cisplatin, nitrogen mustard, carboplatin</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Loop diuretic agents</strong>: ethacrynic acid, furosemide, acetazolamide, torsemide, azosemide, ozolinone, indacrinone, piretanide</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Metals:</strong> gold, mercury, lead</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span><strong>Other antibiotic agents:</strong> erythromycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin, minocycline, polymyxin B, vancomycin</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Mudd, P. (2019). Ototoxicity. <em>Medscape</em>. Retrieved on 3/7/2020 at: <a href="http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/857679-overview">emedicine.medscape.com/article/857679-overview</a></p>
</div>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2899">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Labyrinthitis is characterized by a sudden onset of incapacitating vertigo, usually with nausea and vomiting, various degrees of hearing loss, and possibly tinnitus. The first episode is usually the worst; subsequent attacks, which usually occur over a period of several weeks to months, are less severe.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2900">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Treatment of bacterial labyrinthitis includes IV antibiotic therapy, fluid replacement, and administration of an antihistamine (e.g., meclizine) and antiemetic medications. Treatment of viral labyrinthitis is based on the patient&#x2019;s symptoms.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>