<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2901">Ototoxicity</h4>
<p class="nonindent">A variety of medications may have adverse effects on the cochlea, vestibular apparatus, or cranial nerve VIII. All but a few, such as aspirin and quinine, cause irreversible hearing loss. Aspirin toxicity can produce bilateral tinnitus. IV medications, especially the aminoglycosides, are a common cause of ototoxicity, because they destroy the hair cells in the organ of Corti (see <a href="c59-sec20.xhtml#ct59-10">Chart 59-10</a>). Antineoplastic agents also cause hair cell death in the cochlea, which can lead to hearing loss (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Mudd, 2019</a>). These medications can be found in the body several months later; side effects are dose dependent, with higher doses causing increased ototoxicity. Therefore, hearing loss may occur at any time, even several months after the last dose of the medication was given.</p>
<p class="indent">To prevent loss of hearing or balance, patients receiving potentially ototoxic medications should be counseled about their side effects. These medications should be used with caution in individuals that are at high risk for complications, such as children, older adults, patients who are pregnant, patients with kidney or liver problems, and patients with current hearing disorders. Blood levels of the medications should be monitored, and patients receiving long-term IV antibiotics should be monitored with an audiogram twice each week during therapy.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>