<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2888">CONDITIONS OF THE INNER EAR</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Disorders of balance are common and dizziness may increase the risk of falls (NIDCD, 2018). The term <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;dizziness:&lt;/b&gt; altered sensation of orientation in space">dizziness</button></strong> is used frequently by patients and health care providers to describe any altered sensation of orientation in space and is more commonly referred to as lightheadedness (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Weber &#x0026; Kelley, 2018</a>). <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;vertigo:&lt;/b&gt; illusion of movement in which the individual or the surroundings are sensed as moving">Vertigo</button></strong> is the misperception or illusion of motion of the person or the surroundings. Most patients with vertigo describe a spinning sensation or say they feel as though objects are moving around them. Ataxia is a failure of muscular coordination and may be present in patients with vestibular disease. Syncope, fainting, and loss of consciousness are not forms of vertigo and usually indicate disease in the cardiovascular system.</p>
<p class="indent"><strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;nystagmus:&lt;/b&gt; involuntary oscillation of the eyeball">Nystagmus</button></strong> is an involuntary rhythmic movement of the eyes. Nystagmus occurs normally when a person watches a rapidly moving object (e.g., through the side window of a moving car or train). However, pathologically, it is an ocular disorder associated with vestibular dysfunction. Nystagmus can be horizontal, vertical, or rotary and can be caused by a disorder in the central or peripheral nervous system.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>