<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s2872">CONDITIONS OF THE MIDDLE EAR</h4>
<h4 class="h4" id="s2873">Tympanic Membrane Perforation</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Perforation of the tympanic membrane is usually caused by infection or trauma. Sources of trauma include skull fracture, injury from explosion, or a severe blow to the ear. Less frequently, perforation is caused by foreign objects (e.g., cotton-tipped applicators, hairpins, keys) that have been pushed too far into the external auditory canal. In addition to tympanic membrane perforation, injury to the ossicles and even the inner ear may result from this type of trauma. During infection, the tympanic membrane can rupture if the pressure in the middle ear exceeds the atmospheric pressure in the external auditory canal.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2874">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Although most tympanic membrane perforations heal spontaneously within weeks after rupture, some may take several months to heal. Some perforations persist because scar tissue grows over the edges of the perforation, preventing extension of the epithelial cells across the margins and final healing. In the case of a head injury or temporal bone fracture, a patient is observed for evidence of cerebrospinal fluid <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;otorrhea:&lt;/b&gt; drainage from the ear">otorrhea</button></strong> or <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;rhinorrhea:&lt;/b&gt; drainage of a large amount of fluid from the nose">rhinorrhea</button></strong>&#x2014;a clear, watery drainage from the ear or nose, respectively. While healing, the ear must be protected from water entering the ear canal.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Surgical Management</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Perforations that do not heal on their own may require surgery. The decision to perform a tympanoplasty (see later section in this chapter) is usually based on the need to prevent potential infection from water entering the ear or the desire to improve the patient&#x2019;s hearing. Performed on an outpatient basis, tympanoplasty may involve a variety of surgical techniques. In all techniques, tissue (commonly from the temporalis fascia) is placed across the perforation to allow healing. Surgery is usually successful in closing the perforation permanently and improving hearing.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>