<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2902">Acoustic Neuroma</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Acoustic neuromas, also referred to as vestibular schwannomas, are slow-growing, benign tumors of cranial nerve VIII, usually arising from the Schwann cells of the vestibular portion of the nerve. Acoustic tumors typically arise within the internal auditory canal and extend into the cerebellopontine angle to press on the brain stem, possibly destroying the vestibular nerve. Most acoustic neuromas are unilateral, except in von Recklinghausen disease (neurofibromatosis type 2), in which bilateral tumors occur (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Norris, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 1957</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page1958" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="1958">p. 1958</span></div>
<p class="indent">Acoustic neuromas develop in one of every 100,000 people in the United States per year (NIDCD, 2017d). These neuromas account for 8% of all intracranial tumors and seem to occur with equal frequency in men and women at any age, although most occur during middle age (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4230">Carlson, Tveiten, Driscoll, et al., 2015</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2903">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The most common assessment findings of patients with acoustic neuromas are unilateral tinnitus and hearing loss with or without vertigo or balance disturbance. It is important to identify asymmetry in audiovestibular test results so that further workup can be performed to rule out an acoustic neuroma. Although conflicting data exist, the only known risk factor for acoustic neuroma is cell phone usage (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Park, Vernick, &#x0026; Ramakrishna, 2019</a>). An MRI scan with a contrast agent (i.e., gadolinium or gadopentetate) is the imaging study of choice. If the patient is claustrophobic or cannot undergo an MRI scan for other reasons, or if the scan is unavailable, a CT scan with contrast dye is performed. However, MRI is more sensitive than CT in delineating a small tumor.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2904">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Three options for managing an acoustic neuroma include: (1) surgical removal, (2) radiation, and (3) observation (Carlson et al., 2015; NIDCD, 2017d). Conservative treatment and routine monitoring are recommended for patients with tumors less than 1.5 cm and for those who are older. For patients who are at low risk, surgical removal of the acoustic tumor is the treatment of choice because these tumors do not respond well to radiation or chemotherapy. Because treatment of acoustic tumors crosses several specialties, the interdisciplinary treatment approach involves a neurologist and a neurosurgeon. The objective of the surgery is to remove the tumor while preserving facial nerve function. Most acoustic tumors have damaged the cochlear portion of cranial nerve VIII resulting in hearing loss. In these patients, surgery is performed using a translabyrinthine approach, and the hearing mechanism is destroyed. If hearing is still good before surgery, a suboccipital or middle cranial fossa approach to removing the tumor may be used. This procedure exposes the lateral third of the internal auditory canal and preserves hearing (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Park et al., 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Potential complications of surgery include facial nerve paralysis, cerebrospinal fluid leakage, meningitis, and cerebral edema. Death from acoustic neuroma surgery is rare (<a href="c59-sec26.xhtml#bib4278">Park et al., 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>