<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2897">Tinnitus</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Tinnitus may be a symptom of an underlying disorder of the ear that is associated with hearing loss or it may be benign. This condition affects approximately 25 million people in the United States and is most prevalent in adults (NIDCD, 2017c). The severity of tinnitus may range from mild to severe. Patients describe tinnitus as a roaring, buzzing, or hissing sound in one or both ears. Numerous factors may contribute to the development of tinnitus, including several ototoxic substances (see <a href="c59-sec20.xhtml#ct59-10">Chart 59-10</a>). Underlying disorders that contribute to tinnitus may include cardiovascular disease, thyroid disease, hyperlipidemia, vitamin B<sub>12</sub> deficiency, psychological disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety), fibromyalgia, otologic disorders (M&#x00E9;ni&#x00E8;re&#x2019;s disease, acoustic neuroma), and neurologic disorders (head injury, multiple sclerosis).</p>
<p class="indent">A physical examination should be performed to determine the cause of tinnitus. Diagnostic testing determines if hearing loss is present. An audiograph speech discrimination test or a tympanogram may be used to help determine the cause. Some forms of tinnitus are irreversible; therefore, patients may need education and counseling about ways of adjusting to their treatment and dealing with tinnitus in the future.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>