<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s2952"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2016" title="2016"></span><strong>Transsphenoidal Approach</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">Tumors within the sella turcica and small adenomas of the pituitary can be removed through a transsphenoidal approach (see <a href="c61-sec03.xhtml#tt61-3">Table 61-3</a>). Although an otorhinolaryngologist may make the initial opening, the neurosurgeon completes the opening into the sphenoidal sinus and exposes the floor of the sella. Microsurgical techniques provide improved illumination, magnification, and visualization so that nearby vital structures can be avoided.</p>
<p class="indent">The transsphenoidal approach offers direct access to the sella turcica with minimal risk of trauma and hemorrhage (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). It avoids many of the risks of craniotomy, and the postoperative discomfort is similar to that of other transnasal surgical procedures. It may also be used for pituitary ablation (destruction) in patients with metastatic breast or prostatic cancer.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2953">Complications</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Manipulation of the posterior pituitary gland during surgery may produce transient diabetes insipidus of several days&#x2019; duration (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). It is treated with vasopressin but occasionally persists. Other complications include CSF leakage, visual disturbances, postoperative meningitis, pneumocephalus (air in the intracranial cavity), and SIADH (see <a href="c45.xhtml">Chapter 45</a>).</p>
<p class="superMheadpH2" id="m15">Preoperative Management</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2954">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The preoperative evaluation includes a series of endocrine tests, rhinologic evaluation (to assess the status of the sinuses and nasal cavity), and neuroradiologic studies. Funduscopic examination and visual field determinations are performed, because the most serious effect of pituitary tumor is localized pressure on the optic nerve or chiasm. In addition, the nasopharyngeal secretions are cultured, because a sinus infection is a contraindication to an intracranial procedure using this approach. Corticosteroids may be given before and after surgery, because the surgery involves removal of the pituitary, which is the source of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Antibiotic agents may or may not be given prophylactically.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2955">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is educated in deep breathing techniques before surgery. In addition, the patient is instructed that after the surgery, they will need to avoid vigorous coughing, blowing the nose, sucking through a straw, or sneezing, because these actions may place increased pressure at the surgical site and cause a CSF leak (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="superMheadpH2" id="m16">Postoperative Management</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2956">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because the procedure disrupts the oral and nasal mucous membranes, management focuses on preventing infection and promoting healing. Medications include antimicrobial agents (which are continued until the nasal packing inserted at the time of surgery is removed), corticosteroids, analgesic agents for discomfort, and agents for the control of diabetes insipidus, if necessary (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s2957">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Vital signs are measured to monitor hemodynamic, cardiac, and ventilatory status. Because of the anatomic proximity of the pituitary gland to the optic chiasm, visual acuity and visual fields are assessed at regular intervals. One method is to ask the patient to count the number of fingers held up by the nurse. Evidence of decreasing visual acuity suggests an expanding hematoma.</p>
<p class="indent">The head of the bed is raised to decrease pressure on the sella turcica and to promote normal drainage. The patient is cautioned against blowing the nose or engaging in any activity that raises ICP, such as bending over or straining during urination or defecation.</p>
<p class="indent">Intake and output are measured as a guide to fluid and electrolyte replacement and to assess for diabetes insipidus. The urine specific gravity, serum sodium, and serum osmolality are measured and evaluated regularly. Daily weight is monitored. Fluids are usually given after nausea ceases, and the patient then progresses to a regular diet.</p>
<p class="indent">The nasal packing inserted during surgery is checked frequently for blood or CSF drainage. The major discomfort is related to the nasal packing and to mouth dryness and thirst caused by mouth breathing. Oral care is provided every 4 hours or more frequently. Usually, the teeth are not brushed until the incision above the teeth has healed. Warm saline mouth rinses and the use of a cool mist vaporizer are helpful. Petrolatum is soothing when applied to the lips. The packing is removed in 3 to 4 days, and only then can the area around the nares be cleaned with the prescribed solution to remove crusted blood and moisten the mucous membranes (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Home care considerations include advising the patient to use a room humidifier to keep the mucous membranes moist and to soothe irritation. The head of the bed is elevated at 30 degrees for at least 2 weeks after surgery. The patient is cautioned against blowing the nose or sneezing for at least 1 month, or as directed by their surgeon (<a href="c61-sec13.xhtml#bib4347">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>