<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2031" title="2031"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 62</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Management of Patients with Cerebrovascular Disorders</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe the incidence of, risk factors and preventive measures for, and impact of cerebrovascular disorders.</span></li>
<li><span>Compare the various types of cerebrovascular disorders: their causes, clinical manifestations, and medical management.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain the principles of nursing management as they relate to the care of a patient in the acute stage of an ischemic stroke.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient recovering from an ischemic stroke or from a hemorrhagic stroke.</span></li>
<li><span>Discuss essential elements for family education and preparation for home care of the patient who has had a stroke.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Family</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Functional Ability</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Intracranial Regulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Patient Education</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Perfusion</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Sensory Perception</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">agnosia:</span> loss of ability to recognize objects through a particular sensory system; may be visual, auditory, or tactile</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">aneurysm:</span> a weakening or bulge in an arterial wall</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">aphasia:</span> inability to express oneself or to understand language</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">apraxia:</span> inability to perform previously learned purposeful motor acts on a voluntary basis</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dysarthria:</span> defects of articulation due to neurologic causes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dysphagia:</span> difficulty swallowing</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">expressive aphasia:</span> inability to express oneself; often associated with damage to the left frontal lobe area</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hemianopsia:</span> blindness of half of the field of vision in one or both eyes</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hemiparesis:</span> weakness of one side of the body, or part of it, due to an injury in the motor area of the brain</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">hemiplegia:</span> paralysis of one side of the body, or part of it, due to an injury in the motor area of the brain</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">infarction:</span> tissue necrosis in an area deprived of blood supply</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">penumbra region:</span> area of low cerebral blood flow</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">receptive aphasia:</span> inability to understand what someone else is saying; often associated with damage to the temporal lobe area</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent"><em>Cerebrovascular disorder</em> is an umbrella term that refers to a functional abnormality of the central nervous system (CNS) that occurs when the blood supply to the brain is disrupted. Stroke is the primary cerebrovascular disorder in the United States, and while it dropped from the fourth to the fifth leading cause of death, it is still a leading cause of serious, long-term disability. Approximately 795,000 people experience a stroke each year in the United States. Approximately 610,000 of these are new strokes, and 185,000 are recurrent strokes (<a href="c62-sec02.xhtml#bib4377">Virani, Alonso, Benjamin, et al., 2020</a>). About 7 million Americans over the age of 20 who have survived a stroke are alive today. The financial impact of stroke is profound, with estimated direct and indirect costs of $45.5 billion from 2014 to 2015 (<a href="c62-sec02.xhtml#bib4384">Virani et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Strokes can be divided into two major categories: ischemic (approximately 87%), in which vascular occlusion and significant hypoperfusion occur, and hemorrhagic (approximately 13%), in which there is extravasation of blood into the brain or subarachnoid space (<a href="c62-sec02.xhtml#bib4384">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>; <a href="c62-sec02.xhtml#bib4384">Virani et al., 2020</a>). Although there are some similarities between the two types of stroke, differences exist in etiology, pathophysiology, medical management, surgical management, and nursing care. <a href="#tt62-1">Table 62-1</a> compares ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 2031</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page2032" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="2032">p. 2032</span></div>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt62-1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;62-1</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Comparison of Major Types of Stroke</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Types of Stroke</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Causes</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Main Presenting Symptoms</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Functional Recovery</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Ischemic</strong></p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Large artery thrombosis</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Small penetrating artery thrombosis</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cardiogenic embolic</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cryptogenic (no known cause)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Other</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body, aphasia, vision loss (homonymous hemianopsia)</p></td>
<td class="td1">
<p class="tbodyleft">Majority of recovery made in the first 3&#x2013;6 mo, slower steps toward recovery may be made up to 1 yr and beyond with therapy.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Hemorrhagic</strong></p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Intracerebral hemorrhage</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Subarachnoid hemorrhage</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cerebral aneurysm</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Arteriovenous malformation</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>&#x201C;Worst headache of my life&#x201D;</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreased level of consciousness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Seizure</p></td>
<td class="td2">
<p class="tbodyleft">Slower recovery, typically left with more disability.</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Hickey, J. V., &#x0026; Strayer, A. L. (2020). <em>The clinical practice of neurological &#x0026; neurosurgical nursing</em> (8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins.</p>
</div>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>