<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s3074">DISORDERS OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM</h4>
<h4 class="h4a" id="s3075"><strong>Peripheral Neuropathies</strong></h4>
<p class="nonindent">A peripheral <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;neuropathy:&lt;/b&gt; a long-term complication of diabetes resulting from damage to the nerve cell">neuropathy</button></strong> (disorder of the nervous system) is a disorder affecting the peripheral motor and sensory nerves. Peripheral nerves connect the spinal cord and brain to all other organs. They transmit motor impulses from the brain and relay sensory impulses to the brain. Peripheral neuropathies are characterized by bilateral and symmetric disturbance of function, usually beginning in the feet and hands. The most common cause of peripheral neuropathy is diabetes with poor glycemic control (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). Many drugs, such as antineoplastic agents, also cause peripheral neuropathies (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). The major symptoms of peripheral nerve disorders are loss of sensation, muscle atrophy, weakness, diminished reflexes, pain, and paresthesia of the extremities.</p>
<p class="indent">Peripheral nerve disorders are diagnosed by history, physical examination, and electrodiagnostic studies such as EEG. The diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy in the older adult population is challenging because many symptoms, such as decreased reflexes, can be associated with the normal aging process (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Eliopoulos, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">No specific treatment exists for peripheral neuropathy. Elimination or control of the cause may slow progression. Patients with peripheral neuropathy are at risk for falls, thermal injuries, and skin breakdown. The plan of care includes inspection of the lower extremities for skin breakdown. Assistive devices such as a walker or cane may decrease the risk of falls. Bathwater temperature is checked to avoid thermal injury. Footwear should be accurately sized. Driving may be limited or eliminated, thereby disrupting the patient&#x2019;s sense of independence.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>