<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3042">Creutzfeldt&#x2013;Jakob and Variant Creutzfeldt&#x2013;Jakob Diseases</h4>
<p class="nonindent">CJD and vCJD belong to a group of degenerative, infectious neurologic disorders called <em>transmissible spongiform encephalopathies</em> (TSE). CJD is rare and has no identifiable cause. vCJD, the human variation of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) (mad cow disease), results from ingesting meat infected with prions. <strong>Prions</strong>, which cause TSEs, are pathogens smaller than a virus that are resistant to standard methods of disinfection and sterilization (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Garcia, 2019</a>). Although CJD and vCJD have distinct clinical features, one characteristic they share is a lack of CNS inflammation. CJD may lie dormant for decades before causing neurologic degeneration. The incubation period of vCJD seems to be shorter (less than 10 years). In both diseases, the symptoms are progressive, there is no definitive treatment, and the outcome is fatal often within 1&#x00A0;year of symptom onset (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Almost all cases of vCJD have been reported in the United Kingdom, with a smaller number of cases being identified in 10 other countries worldwide. The risk of vCJD in the United States is thought to be low, because cattle are fed primarily with soy-derived feed as opposed to feed containing animal parts.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3043">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The prion is a unique pathogen because it lacks nucleic acid, which enables the organism to withstand conventional means of disinfection and sterilization (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Garcia, 2019</a>). In both CJD and vCJD, the prion crosses the blood&#x2013;brain barrier and is deposited in brain tissue and causes degeneration of brain tissue (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). Cell death occurs, and spongiform changes (spongy vacuoles) are produced in the brain. The spongiform vacuoles are surrounded by amyloid plaque.</p>
<p class="indent">There are three major forms of CJD (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Manthorpe &#x0026; Simcock, 2019</a>). Approximately 85% of cases appear sporadically, hence this form is called sporadic CJD. The incidence <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2094" title="2094"></span>is 1 case per 1 million people. Sporadic CJD occurs spontaneously with no risk factors. The second form is familial or hereditary CJD, and this type accounts for 5% to 10% of cases. The third type is acquired CJD. This form is transmitted by contaminated brain, tissue, or neurosurgical instruments and accounts for less than 1% of cases (World Health Organization [WHO]. n.d.).</p>
<p class="indent">The prion exists in lymphoid tissue and blood in both vCJD and CJD. Both prion diseases are believed to be bloodborne. No method is available to screen blood for infectivity. For this reason, the American Red Cross does not accept blood donation from anyone who has stayed more than 3 months in the United Kingdom (UK) between 1980 and 1996 or has received a blood transfusion in France or the UK at any time between 1980 and the present (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Miller, Grima, &#x0026; Plonowski, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3044">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">CJD and vCJD have several clinically distinct features. Psychiatric symptoms occur early in vCJD, whereas they are a late symptom in CJD. The mean age at onset of vCJD is 27&#x00A0;years, whereas the mean age for CJD onset is 65 years. The presenting symptoms of vCJD include affective symptoms (i.e., behavioral changes), sensory disturbance, and limb pain. Muscle spasms and rigidity, dysarthria (difficulty speaking), incoordination, cognitive impairment, and sleep disturbances follow. Patients with sporadic CJD present with mental deterioration, <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;ataxia:&lt;/b&gt; inability to coordinate muscle movements, resulting in difficulty in walking, talking, and performing self-care activities">ataxia</button></strong> (inability to coordinate movements), and visual disturbance. Memory loss, involuntary movement, paralysis, and mutism occur as the disease progresses. After clinical presentation, people with vCJD survive an average of 14 months; those with CJD survive for less than 1 year (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Manthorpe &#x0026; Simcock, 2019</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3045">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Brain biopsy, the only way to confirm diagnosis, is not recommended (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). The three diagnostic tests currently used in suspicious clinical presentations to support the diagnosis of CJD are immunologic assessment, EEG, and MRI scanning. Immunologic assessment of CSF detects a protein kinase inhibitor referred to as 14&#x2013;3&#x2013;3 (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). The presence of this inhibitor indicates neuronal cell death, which is not specific to CJD but does support the diagnosis. The EEG reveals a characteristic pattern over the duration of the disease. After initial slowing, the EEG shows periodic activity. Later in the course of the disease, the EEG shows burst suppressions characterized by periodic spikes alternating with slow periods. The MRI scan demonstrates symmetric or unilateral hyperintense signals arising from the basal ganglia.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3046">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">After the onset of specific neurologic symptoms, progression of disease occurs quickly. There is no effective treatment for CJD or vCJD. The care of the patient is supportive and palliative. Goals of the interprofessional care team include prevention of injury related to immobility and dementia, promotion of patient comfort, and provision of support and education for the family.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3047">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The nursing care of patients is primarily supportive and palliative. Psychological and emotional support of the patient and family throughout the course of the illness is needed. Care extends to providing for a dignified death and supporting the family through the processes of grief and loss. Hospice services are appropriate either at home or at an inpatient facility. See <a href="c13.xhtml">Chapter 13</a> for an in-depth discussion of end-of-life issues.</p>
<p class="indent">Prevention of disease transmission is an important part of nursing care. Although patient isolation is not necessary, the use of standard precautions is important. Institutional protocols are followed for handling of brain, spinal cord, pituitary gland, and eye tissue; and for exposure and decontamination of equipment. If surgery is necessary, it is recommended that disposable instruments be used and then incinerated, because conventional methods of sterilization do not destroy the prion (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). If disposable instruments cannot be used, stringent sterilization methods such as the use of bleach for cleaning and extended sterilization time for instruments should be used (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Garcia, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>