<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3036"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2093" title="2093"></span>Arthropod-Borne Virus Encephalitis</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Arthropod-borne viruses, or arboviruses, are maintained in nature through biologic transmission between susceptible vertebrate hosts by blood feeding arthropods (mosquitoes, psychodids, ceratopogonids, and ticks). Arthropod vectors transmit several types of viruses that cause encephalitis. The main vector in North America is the mosquito. Arbovirus infection (transmitted by arthropod vectors) occurs in specific geographic areas during the summer and fall. In the United States, there are five main arboviral encephalitides: eastern equine encephalitis, western equine encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, La Crosse encephalitis, and West Nile virus encephalitis (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3037">Pathophysiology</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Viral replication occurs at the site of the mosquito bite. The host immune response attempts to control viral replication. If the immune response is inadequate, viremia will ensue. The virus gains access to the CNS via the olfactory tract, resulting in encephalitis. It spreads from neuron to neuron, predominantly affecting the cortical gray matter, the brainstem, and the thalamus. Meningeal exudates compound the clinical presentation by irritating the meninges and increasing ICP.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3038">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">St. Louis and West Nile virus encephalitis most commonly affect adults. An arboviral encephalitis occurs along a continuum with some cases having only flulike symptoms (i.e., headache and fever) but others progressing to specific neurologic manifestations that vary depending on the viral type (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). A unique clinical feature of arboviral encephalitis is SIADH with hyponatremia. Onset of symptoms is abrupt with fever, headache, dizziness, nausea, and malaise. If the disease spreads to the CNS, symptoms include stiff neck, confusion, dizziness, and tremors. Coma can occur in severe cases, and mortality increases with age. Eastern equine encephalitis has the highest mortality rate at 50% (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3039">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Arboviral infections are seasonal. Preliminary diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and location and dates of recent travel because certain viruses are endemic to certain geographic locales. Neuroimaging and CSF evaluation are useful in the diagnosis of encephalitis. The MRI scan demonstrates inflammation of the basal ganglia in cases of St.&#x00A0;Louis encephalitis and inflammation in the periventricular area in cases of West Nile encephalitis. EEG can identify abnormal brain waves, which can help identify some viral infections.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3040">Medical Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">No specific medication for arboviral encephalitis exists; therefore, treatment is supportive and symptom management is key (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). Controlling elevated ICP is a critical component of care in cases with neurologic manifestations.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3041">Nursing Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Many patients, particularly those with only fever and headache, are treated on an outpatient basis. If the patient is very ill, hospitalization may be required. The nurse carefully assesses neurologic status and identifies improvement or deterioration in the patient&#x2019;s condition. See <a href="c61.xhtml">Chapter 61</a> for management of the patient with increased ICP. Injury prevention is key in light of the potential for falls or seizures. Any encephalitis that progresses may result in death or lifelong residual health issues such as neurologic deficits and seizures. The family will need support and education to cope with these residual issues. The nurse may need to mobilize community support services for the patient and family, because the recovery may be long.</p>
<p class="indent">Public education addressing the prevention of arboviral encephalitis is a key nursing role. Clothing that provides coverage and insect repellents containing 20% to 35% diethyltoluamide (DEET) should be used on exposed clothing and skin in high-risk areas to decrease mosquito and tick bites (<a href="c64-sec15.xhtml#bib4481">Hickey &#x0026; Strayer, 2020</a>). Remaining indoors at dawn and dusk when mosquito activity is highest is recommended. Screens should be in good repair in the home, and standing water should be removed. All cases of arboviral encephalitis must be reported to the local health department.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>