<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2112" title="2112"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 65</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Management of Patients with Oncologic or Degenerative Neurologic Disorders</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe brain and spinal cord tumors: their classification, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and medical and nursing management.</span></li>
<li><span>Use the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient with nervous system metastases or primary brain tumor.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain the pathophysiologic processes responsible for various neurodegenerative disorders.</span></li>
<li><span>Apply the nursing process as a framework for care of the patient with Parkinson&#x2019;s disease or the patient who has had a cervical discectomy.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Family</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Fluids and Electrolytes</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Infection</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Intracranial Regulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Mobility</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Nutrition</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Patient Education</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Sensory Perception</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Stress and Coping</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">bradykinesia:</span> abnormally slow voluntary movements and speech</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">chorea:</span> rapid, jerky, involuntary, purposeless movements of the extremities or facial muscles, including facial grimacing</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dementia:</span> broad term for a syndrome characterized by a general decline in higher brain functioning, such as reasoning, with a pattern of eventual decline in ability to perform even basic activities of daily living, such as toileting and eating</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dyskinesia:</span> impaired ability to execute voluntary movements</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">dysphonia:</span> voice impairment or altered voice production</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">neurodegenerative:</span> deterioration of cells or function of the nervous system</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">papilledema:</span> edema of the optic nerve usually due to increased intracranial pressure (ICP)</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">paresthesia:</span> numbness, tingling, or a &#x201C;pins and needles&#x201D; sensation</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">sciatica:</span> pain and tenderness that radiates along the sciatic nerve that runs through the thigh and leg</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">spondylosis:</span> degenerative changes occurring in a disc and adjacent vertebral bodies; can occur in the cervical or lumbar vertebrae</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<p class="nonindent">The occurrence of oncologic or degenerative disease processes in the neurologic system produces a unique set of nursing challenges. Thus, nurses who care for patients with these disorders must have a clear understanding of the pathophysiology, diagnostic testing, medical and nursing care, and rehabilitation processes. Nurses provide care for patients with oncologic or degenerative disease processes in many inpatient and outpatient settings. Oncologic disorders include brain and spinal cord tumors. Degenerative neurologic disorders include Parkinson&#x2019;s disease (PD), Huntington disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), muscular dystrophies, and degenerative disc disease. Post-polio syndrome (PPS) is thought to be degenerative in nature and is included in this chapter.</p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>