<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3246">Spider Bites</h4>
<p class="nonindent">There are two venomous spiders found in the United States that may interact with humans: the brown recluse and the black widow. Both are usually found in dark places such as closets, woodpiles, and attics, as well as in shoes (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Brown recluse spider bites are painless. Systemic effects such as fever and chills, nausea and vomiting, malaise, and joint pain develop within 24 to 72 hours. The site of the bite may appear reddish to purple in color within 2 to 8 hours after the bite. Necrosis occurs in the next 2 to 4 days in approximately 10% of cases. The center of the bite may become necrotic, and surgical d&#x00E9;bridement may be necessary. Wound care consists of cleansing with soap and water, and hyperbaric oxygen treatments may be helpful. Most wounds heal within 2 to 3 months (ENA, 2020a; Tintinalli et al., 2020).</p>
<p class="indent">Black widow spider bites feel like pinpricks. Systemic effects usually occur within 30 minutes&#x2014;much more rapidly than with brown recluse spider bites. Signs and symptoms include abdominal rigidity, nausea and vomiting, hypertension, tachycardia, and paresthesias. Severe pain also develops within 60 minutes and increases over 1 to 2 days. Treatment involves application of ice to the site to decrease swelling and discomfort, along with elevation and assessment of tetanus immunization status. Analgesic agents and benzodiazepines may relieve muscle spasms. Cardiopulmonary monitoring is essential. Antivenin is effective for severe black widow spider bites. This antivenin is horse serum based; therefore, testing for sensitivity must be performed prior to administration (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>