<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3237">Nonfatal Drowning</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Nonfatal drowning is defined as survival for at least 24 hours after submersion that caused a respiratory arrest. The most common consequence is hypoxemia. Children under 5 years of age and those over the age of 85 have the highest risk of drowning. An estimated 320,000 drownings occur throughout the world annually, accounting for 7% of global mortality from unintentional injury (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4679">World Health Organization [WHO], 2020</a>). Drowning and nonfatal drowning can be prevented by avoiding rip currents offshore; approximately 85% of shore drownings involve a rip current. Pool drownings can be prevented by surrounding the pool with fencing, a self-latching/closing gate, and providing swimming lessons. Supervision near water is still the best prevention measure. When boating, a personal flotation device (PFD), even for swimmers, prevents drowning events. Approximately 50% of nonfatal drownings require hospital admission for management (WHO, 2020).</p>
<p class="indent">Factors associated with drowning and nonfatal drowning include alcohol ingestion, inability to swim, diving injuries, hypothermia, and exhaustion. The majority of drowning events occur in pools, lakes, and bathtubs. Suicide by drowning rarely occurs in pools and rarely involves alcohol (WHO, 2020).</p>
<p class="indent">Efforts to save the patient should not be abandoned prematurely. Successful resuscitation with full neurologic recovery has occurred in patients who have experienced nonfatal drowning after prolonged submersion in cold water (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4666">Parenteau, Stockinger, Hughes, et al., 2018</a>). This is possible because of a decrease in metabolic demands and the diving reflex. The nonfatal drowning process involves the onset of hypoxia, hypercapnia, bradycardia, and arrhythmias. If there is a violent struggle associated with the nonfatal drowning episode, exercise-induced acidosis and tachypnea can result in aspiration. Hypoxia and acidosis cause eventual apnea and loss of consciousness. When the victim loses consciousness and makes a final effort to breathe, the terminal gasp occurs. Water then moves passively into the airways prior to death.</p>
<p class="indent">After resuscitation, hypoxia and acidosis are the major complications experienced by a person who has experienced nonfatal drowning; immediate intervention in the ED is essential. Resultant pathophysiologic changes and pulmonary injury depend on the type of fluid (fresh or salt water) and the volume aspirated. Freshwater aspiration results in a loss of surfactant and, therefore, an inability to expand the lungs. Salt-water aspiration leads to pulmonary edema from the osmotic effects of the salt within the lungs. If a person survives submersion, ARDS, resulting in hypoxia, hypercarbia, and respiratory or metabolic acidosis, can occur (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3238">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Therapeutic goals include maintaining cerebral perfusion and adequate oxygenation to prevent further damage to vital organs. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation is the factor with the greatest influence on survival. The most important priority in resuscitation is to manage the hypoxia, acidosis, and hypothermia. Prevention and management of hypoxia are accomplished by ensuring an adequate airway and respiration, thus improving ventilation (which helps correct respiratory acidosis) and oxygenation. Arterial blood gases are monitored to evaluate oxygen, carbon dioxide, bicarbonate levels, and pH. These parameters determine the type of ventilatory support needed. The use of endotracheal intubation with PEEP improves oxygenation, prevents aspiration, and corrects intrapulmonary shunting and ventilation&#x2013;perfusion abnormalities (caused by aspiration of water). If the patient is breathing spontaneously, supplemental oxygen may be given by mask. However, an endotracheal tube is necessary if the patient does not breathe spontaneously.</p>
<p class="indent">Because of submersion, the patient is usually hypothermic. A rectal probe or other core measurement device is used to determine the degree of hypothermia. Prescribed rewarming procedures (e.g., extracorporeal warming, warmed peritoneal dialysis, inhalation of warm aerosolized oxygen, torso warming) are started during resuscitation. The choice of warming method is determined by the severity and duration of hypothermia and available resources. Intravascular volume expansion and inotropic agents are used to treat hypotension and impaired tissue perfusion. ECG monitoring is initiated, because arrhythmias frequently occur. An indwelling urinary catheter is inserted to measure urine output. Hypothermia and accompanying metabolic acidosis may compromise kidney function. Nasogastric intubation is used to decompress the stomach and to prevent the patient from aspirating gastric contents.</p>
<p class="indent">Even if the patient appears healthy, close monitoring continues with serial vital signs, serial arterial blood gas values, ECG monitoring, intracranial pressure assessments, serum electrolyte levels, intake and output, and serial chest x-rays. After a nonfatal drowning, the patient is at risk for complications such as hypoxic or ischemic cerebral injury, ARDS, and life-threatening cardiac arrest. The patient is also at heightened risk for aspiration; vomiting frequently occurs <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2200" title="2200"></span>in patients requiring rescue breathing and in up to 86% of patients requiring CPR (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>