<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3221">Crush Injuries</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Crush injuries occur when a person is caught between opposing forces (e.g., run over by a moving vehicle, crushed between two cars, crushed under a collapsed building).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3222">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is observed for the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Hypovolemic shock resulting from extravasation of blood and plasma into injured tissues after compression has been released (see <a href="c11.xhtml">Chapter 11</a>)</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Spinal cord injury (see <a href="c63.xhtml">Chapter 63</a>)</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Erythema and blistering of skin (see <a href="c56.xhtml">Chapter 56</a>)</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Fractures (usually an extremity) (see <a href="c37.xhtml">Chapter 37</a>)</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>AKI (e.g., acute tubular necrosis [ATN]) (see <a href="c48.xhtml">Chapter 48</a>)</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3223">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">In conjunction with maintaining the airway, breathing, and circulation, the patient is observed for AKI. Injury to the back can cause renal trauma. Severe muscular damage may cause <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;rhabdomyolysis:&lt;/b&gt; a toxic syndrome caused by widespread injury to skeletal muscle, resulting in myoglobinuria and acute kidney injury">rhabdomyolysis</button></strong>, a toxic syndrome caused by a release of myoglobin from ischemic skeletal muscle, resulting in ATN. See <a href="c48.xhtml">Chapter 48</a> for the treatment of AKI, renal trauma, and ATN. Rhabdomyolysis may also result from major burns (see <a href="c57.xhtml">Chapter 57</a>), heat stroke, and abuse of illicit drugs, in addition to crush injuries (see later discussions). The classic triad of clinical manifestations suggestive of rhabdomyolysis includes myalgias (muscle cramps), generalized muscle weakness, and darkened urine. The serum creatine kinase (CK) is monitored as the most sensitive indicator of rhabdomyolysis; levels in excess of 6000 IU/L are considered diagnostic (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4634">Atias-Varon, Sherman, Yanovich, et al., 2017</a>). In addition to treatment aimed at preventing or treating ATN, major soft tissue injuries are splinted promptly to control bleeding and pain. The serum lactic acid level is monitored; a decrease to less than 2.0 mmol/L is an indication of successful resuscitation (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4664">Nicks, McGinnism, Borron, et al., 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">If an extremity is injured, it is elevated to relieve swelling and pressure. If compartment syndrome develops, the physician may perform a <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;fasciotomy:&lt;/b&gt; an incision made through the fascia to release constriction of underlying muscle">fasciotomy</button></strong> (i.e., surgical incision to the level of the fascia) to restore neurovascular function (see <a href="c37.xhtml">Chapter 37</a>). Medications for pain and anxiety are then given as prescribed, and the patient is quickly transported to the operating suite for wound d&#x00E9;bridement and fracture repair. A hyperbaric oxygen chamber (if available) may be used to hyperoxygenate crushed tissue, if indicated.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>