<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3214">Injury Prevention</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Any discussion of trauma management must address injury prevention. A component of the emergency nurse&#x2019;s daily role is to provide injury prevention information to every patient with whom there is contact, including patients admitted for reasons other than injury (ENA, 2020a). The only way to reduce the incidence of trauma is through prevention.</p>
<p class="indent">There are three components of injury prevention. The first is education. Providing information and materials to help prevent violence and to maintain safety at home and in vehicles is important. Involvement in local injury prevention organizations, nursing organizations, and health fairs promotes wellness and safety. In practice, nursing and other health care professionals should avoid using the word <em>accident,</em> because trauma events are <em>preventable</em> and should be viewed as such rather than as &#x201C;fate&#x201D; or &#x201C;happenstance.&#x201D; Responsibility and accountability must be assigned to traumatic incidents, particularly because of the high rate of trauma recidivism (repeated trauma). People who are at risk for trauma and trauma recidivism should be identified and provided with education and counseling directed toward altering risky behaviors and preventing further trauma (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">The second component of injury prevention is legislation. Nurses should be actively involved in safety legislation at the local, state, and federal levels. Such legislation is meant to provide universal safety measures, not to infringe on rights.</p>
<p class="indent">The third component is automatic protection. Airbags and automotive design are included in this category. These mechanisms provide for safety without requiring personal intervention.</p>
<p class="indent">Emergency nurses may develop injury prevention programs using a focus similar to the ABCDE approach used in the primary survey in trauma care. In this case, however (ENA, 2020a):</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span><em>A</em>&#x2014;describes <em>a</em>ssessment of the community for common injury mechanisms</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span><em>B&#x2014;</em>is used to describe <em>b</em>uilding a coalition of key community members</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span><em>C&#x2014;</em>refers to <em>c</em>ommunicating awareness of the trauma mechanisms and risks prevalent in the local community</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span><em>D&#x2014;</em>stands for <em>d</em>eveloping and implementing interventions, which may be educational or legislative</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span><em>E&#x2014;</em>refers to <em>e</em>valuating the injury prevention program soon after it is launched, which may result in either continuation or revision of the program</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>