<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3264">Sexual Assault</h4>
<p class="nonindent">The definition of <em>rape</em> is forced sexual acts, especially if these acts involve vaginal or anal penetration. Attempted rape may include verbal threats of rape (ENA, 2020a). Perpetrators and victims may be either male or female. Rape crisis centers offer support and education and help people who have been sexually assaulted through the subsequent police investigation and courtroom experience.</p>
<p class="indent">The manner in which the patient is received and treated in the ED is important to their future psychological well-being. Crisis intervention should begin when the patient enters the health care facility. The patient should be seen immediately. Most hospitals have a written protocol that addresses the patient&#x2019;s physical and emotional needs as well as collection of forensic evidence.</p>
<p class="indent">In many states, the emergency nurse has the opportunity to become trained as a sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE). Preparing for this role requires specific training in forensic evidence collection, history taking, documentation, and ways to approach the patient and family. Specialized training also includes learning proper photographic methods and the use of colposcopy. Colposcopy facilitates assessment by magnifying tissues and looking for evidence of microtrauma. Evidence is collected through photography, videography, and analysis of specimens. Another tool useful to the SANE is the light-staining microscope, which enables the examiner to identify motile and nonmotile sperm and infectious organisms. This tool saves time and also enhances assessment. The SANE complements the ED staff and can spend more time with both the patient and police officers investigating the incident (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3265">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The patient&#x2019;s reaction to rape has been termed <em>rape trauma syndrome</em> and is seen as an acute stress reaction to a life-threatening situation. The nurse performing the assessment is aware that the patient may go through several phases of psychological reactions, which have been described as follows (ENA, 2020a):</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>An acute disorganization phase, which may manifest as an expressed state in which shock, disbelief, fear, guilt, humiliation, anger, and other such emotions are encountered or as a controlled state in which feelings are masked or hidden and the victim appears composed.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>A phase of denial and unwillingness to talk about the incident, followed by a phase of heightened anxiety, fear, flashbacks, sleep disturbances, hyperalertness, and psychosomatic reactions that is consistent with PTSD (see later discussion).</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>A phase of reorganization, in which the incident is put into perspective. Some victims never fully recover and go on to develop chronic stress disorders and phobias.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3266">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goals of management are to provide support, to reduce the patient&#x2019;s emotional trauma, and to gather available evidence for possible legal proceedings. All of the interventions are aimed at encouraging the patient to gain a sense of control over their life.</p>
<p class="indent">Throughout the patient&#x2019;s stay in the ED, the patient&#x2019;s privacy and sensitivity must be respected. The patient may exhibit a wide range of emotional reactions, such as hysteria, stoicism, or feelings of being overwhelmed. Support and caring are crucial. The patient should be reassured that anxiety is natural and asked whether a person who can provide support may be called. Appropriate support is available from professional and community resources. The National Sexual Assault Hotline (see the Resources section, under the Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network) will automatically route the patient to the nearest assault or crisis intervention center for services, as needed. The patient should never be left alone.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Physical Examination</h6>
<p class="nonindent">A written, witnessed informed consent must be obtained from the patient (or parent or guardian if the patient is a minor) for examination, for taking of photographs, and for release of findings to police. A history is obtained only if the patient has not already talked to a police officer, social worker, or crisis intervention worker. The patient should not be asked to repeat the history. Any history of the event that is obtained should be recorded in the patient&#x2019;s own words. The patient is asked whether they have bathed, douched, brushed their teeth, changed clothes, urinated, or defecated since the attack, because these actions may alter interpretation of subsequent findings. The time of admission, time of examination, date and time of the alleged rape, and the patient&#x2019;s emotional state and general appearance (including any evidence of trauma, such as discoloration, bruises, lacerations, secretions, or torn and bloody clothing) are documented. If the patient has no recollection of the event, drugs that induce retrograde amnesia may have been involved, such as alcohol, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2213" title="2213"></span>ketamine, gamma-hydroxybutyrate, benzodiazepines, or flunitrazepam. Urine drug test must be completed within 96 hours of the event to capture the presence of these drugs. Emesis can also be collected for testing (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">For the physical examination, the patient is helped to undress and is draped properly. Each item of clothing is placed in a separate paper bag. As noted previously, plastic bags are not used in order to avoid possible destruction of evidence from mold or mildew formation. The bags are labeled and given to appropriate law enforcement authorities.</p>
<p class="indent">The patient is examined (from head to toe) for injuries, especially injuries to the head, neck, breasts, thighs, back, and buttocks. Body diagrams and photographs aid in documenting the evidence of trauma. The physical examination focuses on the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>External evidence of trauma (bruises, contusions, lacerations, stab wounds)</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Dried semen stains (appearing as crusted, flaking areas) on the patient&#x2019;s body or clothes</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Broken fingernails and body tissue and foreign materials under nails (if found, samples are taken)</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Oral examination, including a specimen of saliva and cultures of gum and tooth areas</p>
<p class="indent">Pelvic and rectal examinations are also performed. The perineum and other areas are examined with a Wood lamp or other filtered ultraviolet light. Areas that appear fluorescent may indicate semen stains. The color and consistency of any discharge present is noted. A water-moistened, rather than lubricated, vaginal speculum is used for the examination. Lubricant contains chemicals that may interfere with later forensic testing of specimens and acid phosphatase determinations. The rectum is examined for signs of trauma, blood, and semen. During the examination, the patient should be advised of the nature and necessity of each procedure and given the rationale for each (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Specimen Collection</h6>
<p class="nonindent">During the physical examination, numerous laboratory specimens may be collected, including the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Vaginal aspirate, examined for presence or absence of motile and nonmotile sperm.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Secretions (obtained with a sterile swab) from the vaginal pool for acid phosphatase, blood group antigen of semen, and precipitin test against human sperm and blood.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Separate smears from the oral, vaginal, and anal areas.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Culture of body orifices for gonorrhea.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Blood serum for syphilis and HIV testing and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis. A sample of serum for syphilis may be frozen and saved for future testing.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Pregnancy test if there is a possibility that the female patient may be pregnant.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Any foreign material (leaves, grass, dirt), which is placed in a clean envelope.</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Pubic hair samples obtained by combing or trimming. Several pubic hairs with follicles are placed in separate containers and identified as the patient&#x2019;s hair.</p>
<p class="indent">To preserve the chain of evidence, each specimen is labeled with the name of the patient, the date and time of collection, the body area from which the specimen was obtained, and the names of personnel collecting specimens. The specimens are then given to a designated person (e.g., crime laboratory technician), and an itemized receipt is obtained (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Treating Potential Consequences of Rape</h6>
<p class="nonindent">After the initial physical examination is completed and specimens have been obtained, any associated injuries are treated as indicated. The patient is given the option of prophylaxis against sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (also referred to as sexually transmitted disease [STDs]). Ceftriaxone given intramuscularly with 1% lidocaine may be prescribed as prophylaxis for gonorrhea. In addition, a single oral dose of metronidazole and either a single oral dose of azithromycin or a 7-day oral regimen of doxycycline may be prescribed as prophylaxis for syphilis and chlamydia (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Antipregnancy measures may be considered if the patient is a female of childbearing age. A postcoital contraceptive medication, such as an oral contraceptive medication that contains levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol, may be prescribed after a pregnancy test. To promote effectiveness, the contraceptive medication should be given within 12 to 24&#x00A0;hours and no later than 72 hours after penile-vaginal intercourse. The 21-day package is prescribed so that the patient does not mistakenly take the inert tablets included in the 28-day package. An antiemetic agent may be given as prescribed to decrease discomfort from side effects. A cleansing douche, mouthwash, and fresh clothing are usually offered.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Follow-Up Care</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The patient is informed of counseling services to prevent long-term psychological effects. Counseling services should be made available to both the patient and the family. A referral is made to the National Sexual Assault Hotline (see the Resources section) or directly to a local crisis intervention center. Appointments for follow-up surveillance for pregnancy and for STI and HIV testing also are made (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">The patient is encouraged to return to their previous level of functioning as soon as possible. When leaving the ED, the patient should be accompanied by a family member or friend.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>