<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3239">Decompression Sickness</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Decompression sickness, also known as &#x201C;the bends,&#x201D; occurs in patients who have engaged in diving (lake/ocean diving), high-altitude flying, or flying in commercial aircraft within 24 hours after diving. It occurs relatively infrequently in the United States, but its effects can be hazardous. Being aware of decompression sickness and assessing the patient properly ensures appropriate management and results in decreased morbidity.</p>
<p class="indent">Decompression sickness results from formation of nitrogen bubbles that occur with rapid changes in atmospheric pressure. They may occur in joint or muscle spaces, resulting in musculoskeletal pain, numbness, or hypesthesia. More significantly, nitrogen bubbles can become air emboli in the bloodstream and thereby produce stroke, paralysis, or death. Taking a rapid history about the events preceding the onset of symptoms is essential (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3240">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">To identify decompression sickness, a detailed history is obtained from the patient or diving partner. Evidence of rapid ascent, loss of air in the tank, buddy breathing, recent alcohol intake or lack of sleep, or a flight within 24 hours after diving suggests possible decompression sickness. Some patients describe a perfect dive yet still have the signs and symptoms of decompression sickness, in which case they must receive treatment for the condition.</p>
<p class="indent">Signs and symptoms include joint or extremity pain, numbness, hypesthesia, and loss of range of motion. Neurologic symptoms mimicking those of a stroke or spinal cord injury can indicate an air embolus. Cardiopulmonary arrest can also occur in severe cases and is usually fatal. Any neurologic symptoms should be rapidly assessed. All patients with decompression sickness need rapid transfer to a hyperbaric chamber (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3241">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A patent airway and adequate ventilation are established, as described previously, and 100% oxygen is given throughout treatment and transport. A chest x-ray is obtained to identify aspiration, and at least one IV line is started with lactated Ringer&#x2019;s or normal saline solution. Research findings suggest that among patients requiring air transport (e.g., helicopter), oxygen saturations and symptoms improve when both oxygen and IV fluids are given. If air transport is required, the aircraft should remain at low altitude (i.e., below 300 m [approximately 1000 feet]) (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Holleran, Wolfe, &#x0026; Frakes, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The cardiopulmonary and neurologic systems are supported as needed. If an air embolus is suspected, the head of the bed should be lowered. If the patient&#x2019;s wet clothing is still present, it is removed. The patient is kept warm. Transfer to the closest hyperbaric chamber for treatment is initiated. However, the patient who is awake and alert without central neurologic deficits may be able to travel by ground ambulance or by automobile, depending on the severity of symptoms. Throughout treatment, the patient is continually assessed, and changes are documented. If aspiration is suspected, antibiotic agents and other treatment may be prescribed (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>