<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3267">Human Trafficking</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Human trafficking is a type of modern-day slavery and one of the fastest growing global health issues. Human trafficking is defined as the exploitation of individuals with the use of force, fraud, coercion, or deception (ENA, 2018c; Roney &#x0026; Villano, 2020). In 2016, an estimated 40.3 million people were trafficked; 1 in 4 of these were children, with nearly 25 million people involved in forced labor (ENA, 2018c). In the United States in 2018, over 23,078 contacts used the National Human Trafficking Hotline, which was a 25% increase compared to 2017 (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4667">Polaris Project, National Human Trafficking Hotline, 2018</a>). People subjected to human trafficking have limited access to health care, and the ED may be the only access point to identify their situation (ENA, 2018c).</p>
<p class="indent">A victim of trafficking may present to the ED with injury, accompanied by a significantly older boyfriend or travel partner. The victim may have a history of being a chronic runaway, or of homelessness, and of self-mutilation. Common behaviors exhibited by these patients may include cowering or deferring to the person accompanying them, who may <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2214" title="2214"></span>appear controlling, and appearing frightened or agitated. The patient may have a special mark/tattoo present, poor dentition, and multiple injuries in various stages of healing. Common physical complaints include injuries, poor healing or poorly healed old injuries, abdominal pain, dizziness, headaches, rashes, or sores. Patients may demonstrate addiction, panic attacks, impulse control, hostility, and suicidal ideation (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Roney &#x0026; Villano, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The ED nurse may be well positioned to offer an opportunity for the patient to speak, alone without an accompanying companion, who could be a perpetrator of abuse. Targeted, appropriate questions may include asking patients if they are in control of their own money; whether or not they are able to come and go as they please; and who is the person or persons accompanying them (ENA, 2020a). Patients may decline assistance. The National Human Trafficking Hotline may be tapped into as a resource (see the Resources section).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>