<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3213">Collection of Forensic Evidence</h4>
<p class="nonindent">In assessing and managing any patient with an emergency condition, but especially the patient experiencing trauma, meticulous documentation is essential. Included in documentation are descriptions of all wounds, mechanism of injury, time of events, and collection of evidence. In trauma care, the nurse must be exceedingly careful with all potential evidence, handling and documenting it properly.</p>
<p class="indent">The basics of care management for patients with traumatic injury include an understanding that trauma in any patient (living or dead) has potential legal or forensic science implications if criminal activity is suspected. Hence, proper management from both a medical and forensic evidence perspective is essential.</p>
<p class="indent">When clothing is removed from the patient who has experienced trauma, the nurse must be careful not to cut <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2192" title="2192"></span>through or disrupt any tears, holes, blood stains, or dirt present on the clothing if criminal activity is suspected. Each piece of clothing should be placed in an individual paper bag. Plastic bags are not used because they retain moisture; moisture may promote mold and mildew formation, which can destroy evidence. If the clothing is wet, it should be hung to dry. Clothing should not be given to families. Valuables should be inventoried and either placed in the hospital safe or clearly documented to which family member they were given. If a police officer is present to collect clothing or any other items from the patient, each item is labeled and the transfer of custody to the officer, the officer&#x2019;s name, the date, and the time are documented. Evidence cannot be left unattended in the room; a formal chain of custody must be maintained for the evidence to be valid and useful for legal purposes (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">All deaths of patients who experienced trauma are reported to the medical examiner. If suicide or homicide is suspected in a patient who experienced trauma, the medical examiner examines the body on site or has the body moved to the coroner&#x2019;s office for autopsy. All tubes and lines must remain in place. The patient&#x2019;s hands must be covered with paper bags to protect evidence on the hands or under the fingernails. In the patient who has survived trauma, tissue specimens may be swabbed from the hands and nails as potential evidence. Photographs of wounds or clothing are essential and should include a reference ruler in one photo and another without the ruler.</p>
<p class="indent">Documentation should also include any statements made by the patient in the patient&#x2019;s own words and surrounded by quotation marks. A chain of evidence is essential. If the patient&#x2019;s case is reviewed in a court of law in the future, clear documentation assists the judicial process and helps to identify the activities that occurred in the ED.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>