<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3269">Patients Who Are Overactive</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Patients who display disturbed, uncooperative, and paranoid behavior and those who feel anxious and panicky may be prone to assaultive and destructive impulses and abnormal social behavior. Intense nervousness, depression, and crying are evident in some patients. Disturbed and noisy behavior may be exacerbated or compounded by alcohol or drug intoxication.</p>
<p class="indent">A reliable source for obtaining an accurate history is needed to identify events leading to the crisis. Past mental illness, hospitalizations, injuries, serious illnesses, the use of alcohol or drugs, crises in interpersonal relationships, or intrapsychic conflicts are explored. Because abnormal thoughts and behavior may be manifestations of an underlying physical disorder, such as hypoglycemia, drug or alcohol toxicity, a stroke, a seizure disorder, or head injury, a physical assessment is also performed.</p>
<p class="indent">The immediate goal is to gain control of the situation. If the patient is potentially violent, security or police should be nearby. Restraints are used as a last resort and only as prescribed. Approaching the patient with a composed, confident, and firm manner is therapeutic and has a calming effect. Helpful interventions include the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Introduce yourself by name.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Tell the patient, &#x201C;I am here to help you.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Repeat the patient&#x2019;s name from time to time.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Speak in one-thought sentences, and be consistent.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Give the patient space and time to slow down.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Show interest in, listen to, and encourage the patient to talk about personal thoughts and feelings.</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Offer appropriate and honest explanations.</p>
<p class="indent">A psychotropic agent (e.g., one that exerts an effect on the mind) may be prescribed for emergency management of functional psychosis. However, a patient with a personality disorder should not be treated with psychotropic medications, and psychotropic medications should not be used if the patient&#x2019;s behavior results from the use of hallucinogens (e.g., lysergic acid diethylamide [LSD]).</p>
<p class="indent">Agents such as chlorpromazine and haloperidol act specifically against psychotic symptoms of thought fragmentation and perceptual and behavioral aberrations. The initial dose depends on the patient&#x2019;s body weight and the severity of the symptoms. After administration of the initial dose, the patient is observed closely to determine the degree of change in psychotic behavior. Subsequent doses depend on the patient&#x2019;s response. Typically, after stabilization, the patient is transferred to an inpatient psychiatric unit, or psychiatric outpatient treatment is arranged (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>