<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3195">Community and Transitional Services</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Before discharge, some patients require the services of a social worker to help them meet continuing health care needs. Home health care resources may be contacted before discharge to arrange services. This is particularly important for patients who may need assistance, such as those who are older adults or those with disability. Identifying continuing health care needs and making arrangements for meeting these needs can prevent return visits to the ED or readmission to the hospital.</p>
<p class="indent">For patients who are returning to long-term care facilities and for those who already rely on community agencies for continuing health care, communication about the patient&#x2019;s condition and any changes in health care needs that have occurred must be provided to the appropriate facilities or agencies. This communication is essential to promote continuity of care and to ensure ongoing care that meets the patient&#x2019;s changing health care needs.</p>
<p class="indent">Many patients who utilize EDs have health problems that are nonurgent. Moreover, some patients return repeatedly to the ED with nonurgent problems (ENA, 2019). It is posited that patients who present to the ED with nonurgent problems do so because there is a dearth of outpatient health care resources to fill their needs. In order to fill these gaps, some areas of the United States, particularly rural areas, are offering mobile integrated health-community paramedicine programs. Emergency medical system (EMS) personnel provide in-home visits, without emergency calls, to identify needs and provide education and in-home care. If necessary, they can also transport patients to the ED. These programs have decreased unnecessary EMS calls (ENA, 2019).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>