<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3253">Skin Contamination Poisoning (Chemical Burns)</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Skin contamination injuries from exposure to chemicals are challenging because of the large number of possible offending agents with diverse actions and metabolic effects. The severity of a chemical burn is determined by the mechanism of action, the penetrating strength and concentration, and the amount and duration of exposure of the skin to the chemical. A wet chemical should be removed as soon as possible with copious amounts of water. Dry substances should be gently brushed off the skin before the area is flushed (ENA, 2020a). The skin should be flushed with a constant stream of cool water as the patient&#x2019;s clothing is removed. The skin of health care personnel assisting the patient should be appropriately protected if the burn is extensive or if the agent is significantly toxic or still present. Prolonged lavage with generous amounts of tepid water is important. The decontamination shower (deluge) in the ED is the optimal place for total body flushing. The staff attending the patient should wear proper PPE to prevent cross-contamination (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Veenema, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Attempts to determine the identity and characteristics of the chemical agent are necessary in order to specify future treatment. The standard burn treatment appropriate for the size and location of the wound (antimicrobial treatment, d&#x00E9;bridement, tetanus prophylaxis, antidote administration as prescribed) is instituted (ENA, 2020a) (see <a href="c57.xhtml">Chapter 57</a>). The patient may require plastic surgery for further wound management. The patient is instructed to have the affected area reexamined at 24 and 72 hours and in 7 days because of the risk of underestimating the extent and depth of these types of injuries.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>