<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3231">Frostbite</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Frostbite is trauma from exposure to freezing temperatures and freezing of the intracellular fluid and fluids in the intercellular spaces. It results in cellular and vascular damage. Frostbite can result in venous stasis and thrombosis. Body parts most frequently affected by frostbite include the feet, hands, nose, and ears. Frostbite ranges from first degree (redness and erythema) to fourth degree (full-depth tissue destruction) (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3232">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">A frozen extremity may be hard, cold, and insensitive to touch and may appear white or mottled blue-white. The extent of injury from exposure to cold is not always initially known. The patient history should include environmental temperature, duration of exposure, clothing worn, humidity, and the presence of wet conditions (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3233">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">The goal of management is to restore normal body temperature. Constrictive clothing and jewelry that could impair circulation are removed. Wet clothing is removed as rapidly as possible. If the lower extremities are involved, the patient <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2198" title="2198"></span>should not be allowed to ambulate as this may exacerbate tissue damage (CDC, 2019b).</p>
<p class="indent">Controlled yet rapid rewarming is instituted. Frozen extremities are usually placed in a 37&#x00B0;C to 40&#x00B0;C (98.6&#x00B0;F to 104&#x00B0;F) circulating bath for 30- to 40-minute spans. This treatment is repeated until circulation is effectively restored. Early rewarming appears to decrease the amount of ultimate tissue loss. During rewarming, an analgesic for pain is given as prescribed, because the rewarming process may be very painful. To avoid further mechanical injury, the body part is not handled. Massage is contraindicated.</p>
<p class="indent">Once rewarmed, the part is protected from further injury and is elevated to help control swelling. Sterile gauze or cotton is placed between affected fingers or toes to prevent maceration, and a bulky dressing is placed on the extremity. A foot cradle may be used to prevent contact with bedclothes if the feet are involved. Hemorrhagic blebs, which may develop 1 hour to a few days after rewarming, are left intact and not ruptured. Nonhemorrhagic blisters are d&#x00E9;brided to decrease the inflammatory mediators found in the blister fluid.</p>
<p class="indent">A physical assessment is conducted with rewarming to observe for concomitant injury, such as soft tissue injury, dehydration, alcohol intoxication, or fat embolism. Problems such as hyperkalemia (e.g., from release of potassium in the damaged cells) and hypovolemia, which occur frequently in people with frostbite, are corrected. Risk of infection is also great; therefore, aseptic technique is used during dressing changes, and tetanus prophylaxis is given as indicated. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are prescribed for their anti-inflammatory effects and to control pain (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Additional measures that may be carried out when appropriate after emergency stabilization measures have been instituted include the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Whirlpool bath for the affected body parts to aid circulation and d&#x00E9;bridement of necrotic tissue to help prevent infection</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Escharotomy (incision through the eschar) to prevent further tissue damage, to allow for normal circulation, and to permit joint motion</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Fasciotomy to treat compartment syndrome</p>
<p class="indent">After rewarming, hourly active motion of any affected digits is encouraged to promote maximal restoration of function and to prevent contractures (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4658">Mayo Clinic, 2019</a>). Discharge instructions also include encouraging the patient to avoid tobacco, alcohol, and caffeine because of their vasoconstrictive effects, which further reduce the already deficient blood supply to injured tissues.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>