<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3243">Snakebites</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Venomous (poisonous) snakes caused more than 2000 of the 6000 snakebites in the United States annually (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>). Across the globe, between 4.5 and 5.4 million people get bitten by snakes each year, with 81,000 to 138,000 dying from complications (WHO, 2019). Children between 1 and 9 years of age are the most likely victims. The greatest number of bites occurs during the daylight hours and early evening of the summer months. The most frequent poisonous snakebite in the United States occurs from Crotalidae, otherwise called pit vipers, such as water moccasins, copperheads, and rattlesnakes. The most common site is the upper extremity (ENA, 2020a). Of pit viper bites, 75% to 80% result in <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;envenomation:&lt;/b&gt; injection of a poisonous material by sting, spine, bite, or other means">envenomation</button></strong> (injection of a poisonous material by sting, spine, bite, or other means); the rest result in what are called <em>dry bites</em> (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>). Venomous snakebites are medical emergencies.</p>
<p class="indent">Nineteen different species of venomous snakes are found in various regions within the United States. Nurses should be familiar with the types of snakes common to the geographic region in which they practice. However, the exotic pet industry sells atypical snakes as &#x201C;pets.&#x201D; Because of this, venomous snakes such as cobras and asps may be found outside of their native region.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3244">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Snake venom consists primarily of proteins and has a broad range of physiologic effects. It may affect multiple organ systems, especially the neurologic, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems.</p>
<p class="indent">Classic clinical signs of envenomation are edema, ecchymosis, and hemorrhagic bullae, leading to necrosis at the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2201" title="2201"></span>site of envenomation. Symptoms include lymph node tenderness, nausea, vomiting, numbness, and a metallic taste in the mouth. Without decisive treatment, these clinical manifestations may progress to include fasciculations, hypotension, paresthesias, seizures, and coma (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3245">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Initial first aid at the site of the snakebite includes having the person lie down, removing constrictive items such as rings, providing warmth, cleansing the wound, covering the wound with a light sterile dressing, and immobilizing the injured body part below the level of the heart. CABs are the priorities of care. Ice, incision and suction, or a tourniquet is <em>not</em> applied. Tetanus and analgesia should be given as necessary. Initial evaluation in the ED is performed quickly and includes information about the following (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>):</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Whether the snake was venomous or nonvenomous; discourage bringing the snake for identification&#x2014;even a dead snake&#x2019;s venom is poisonous. Do <em>not</em> handle any snake brought to the ED. If the snake is transported to the ED, caution should be taken because the snake is frequently in a stunned, not dead, state. The bite reflex can remain intact for up to 90 minutes after the death of the snake.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Where and when the bite occurred and the circumstances of the bite.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Sequence of events, signs, and symptoms (fang punctures, pain, edema, and erythema of the bite and nearby tissues).</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Severity of poisonous effects. Call the local poison control phone number to gain access to information about an exotic snakebite presentation and management, as necessary. The poison control center may also be able to assist with retrieving antivenin for these particular species.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Vital signs.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Circumference of the bitten extremity or area at several points. The circumference of the extremity that was bitten is compared with the circumference of the opposite extremity.</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Laboratory data (complete blood count, urinalysis, and coagulation studies).</p>
<p class="indent">The course and prognosis of snakebite injuries depend on the kind and amount of venom injected; where on the body the bite occurred; and the general health, age, and size of the patient. There is no one specific protocol for treatment of snakebites. In general, ice, tourniquets, heparin, and corticosteroids are not used during the acute stage. Corticosteroids are contraindicated in the first 6 to 8 hours after the bite because they may depress antibody production and hinder the action of <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;antivenin:&lt;/b&gt; antitoxin manufactured from venom of poisonous snakes to assist the patient&#x2019;s immune system response to envenomation">antivenin</button></strong> (antitoxin manufactured from the snake venom and used to treat snakebites).</p>
<p class="indent">Parenteral fluids may be used to treat hypotension. If vasopressors are used to treat hypotension, their use should be short term. Surgical exploration of the bite is rarely indicated. Typically, the patient is observed closely for at least 6 hours. The patient is <em>never</em> left unattended.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Administration of Antivenin</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Although envenomation does not always occur, it should always be suspected with snakebites. An assessment of progressive signs and symptoms is essential before considering administration of antivenin, which is most effective if given within 4 hours and no greater than 12 hours after the snakebite. The decision to administer antivenin depends on worsening tissue injury and evidence of systemic and coagulopathic symptoms. Rattlesnakes are more likely to cause coagulation abnormalities as well as more systemic effects. Coagulation abnormalities are not restricted to severe envenomation (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The most readily available antivenin in the United States is Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom (FabAV or CroFab). The dose depends on the type of snake and the estimated severity of the bite. Indications for antivenin depend on the progression of symptoms, including coagulopathy and systemic reaction (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom does not require pretesting (i.e., skin sensitivity screening for an allergic reaction; see <a href="c33.xhtml">Chapter 33</a>), albeit monitoring for a hypersensitivity reaction is still necessary. Outside of the United States, however, other antivenin formulas that may be commercially available may still result in severe serum sickness. If the dose exceeds 10 vials, serum sickness will most likely occur. Serum sickness is a type of hypersensitivity response that results in fever, arthralgias, pruritus, lymphadenopathy, and proteinuria and can progress to neuropathies (ENA, 2020a). However, FabAV must be given cautiously to patients receiving anticoagulation therapy. Administration of FabAV may result in a recurring coagulopathy. The dosage and administration of FabAV are different from previously manufactured types of antivenin and should be reviewed carefully before the medication is given.</p>
<p class="indent">Before administering antivenin and every 15 minutes thereafter, the circumference of the affected part is measured. Premedication with diphenhydramine or cimetidine may be indicated, because these antihistamines may decrease the allergic response to antivenin. Antivenin is given as an IV infusion whenever possible, although intramuscular administration can be used.</p>
<p class="indent">Depending on the severity of the snakebite, the antivenin is diluted in 500 to 1000 mL of normal saline solution. The infusion is started slowly, and the rate is increased after 10 minutes if there is no reaction. The total dose should be infused during the first 4 to 6 hours after the bite. The initial dose is repeated until symptoms decrease, after which time the circumference of the affected part should be measured every 30 to 60 minutes for the next 48 hours to detect symptoms of compartment syndrome (swelling, loss of pulse, increased pain, and paresthesias) (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">There is no limit to the number of antivenin vials that can be given. The decision to continue to administer vials is based upon patient symptoms. Consultation with a snakebite expert is essential at this point; this consultant may be identified and found through contacting the Poison Control Center (see the Resources section) or a local zoo reptile center. The most common cause of allergic reaction to the antivenin is too-rapid infusion. Reactions may consist of a feeling of fullness in the face, urticaria, pruritus, malaise, and apprehension. These symptoms may be followed by tachycardia, shortness of breath, hypotension, and shock. In this situation, the infusion should be stopped immediately and IV diphenhydramine given. Vasopressors are used for patients in shock, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2202" title="2202"></span>and resuscitation equipment must be on standby while antivenin is infusing. It is important to note that serum sickness (hypersensitivity) can occur within the first few weeks after discharge. The patient and the patient&#x2019;s family members should be educated about the clinical manifestations of serum sickness (i.e., fever; rash starting on the chest and spreading to the back; arthralgia; gastrointestinal [GI] disturbances [e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain], and headache) and return to the ED if they occur (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>