<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3242">Animal and Human Bites</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Bites are a common reason for visits to the ED. Dog bites constitute 80% to 90% of these bites and are responsible for the majority of deaths from bites by a nonvenomous animal (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>). Cat bites have a high risk of infection because of the presence of <em>Pasteurella</em> in their saliva. All animal bites must be reported to public health authorities, which must provide follow-up screening of the offending animal for rabies. If the animal cannot be located and rabies vaccination verified, rabies prophylaxis for the person who has been bitten must be instituted (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Human bites are frequently associated with rapes, sexual assaults, or other forms of battery. The human mouth contains more bacteria than that of most other animals, so a high risk of bite-related infection exists. Depending on the circumstances surrounding the event, the victim may delay seeking treatment. The ED nurse should inspect any bitten tissue for pus, erythema, or necrosis. A health care provider should take photographs, which can be used as evidence in criminal and legal proceedings. Guidelines for collecting forensic evidence for photographing with and without a measuring device should be followed. Cleansing with soap and water is then necessary, followed by the administration of antibiotics and tetanus toxoid as prescribed (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>