<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3256">Acute Alcohol Intoxication</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Alcohol is a psychotropic drug that affects mood, judgment, behavior, concentration, and consciousness. Many people who drink heavily are young adults or those older than 60 years. There is a high prevalence of alcoholism among patients presenting to the ED for management; up to 31% have histories of SUD with alcohol. Among patients who present to the ED with various injuries, up to 50% may have histories of SUD with alcohol (ENA, 2020a). Because patients with SUD from alcohol return frequently to the ED, they present a challenge to the health professionals who care for them. The CDC advocates routine screening for SUD with alcohol in all outpatient settings, including EDs. Therefore, screenings, brief interventions, and referral to treatment (SBIRT) for patients presenting with suspected SUD with alcohol are recommended. All level I and II verified trauma centers are required to provide this service. SBIRT is considered cost-effective in saving quality of life-years lost and preventing the morbid consequences of continued SUD with alcohol (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4632">American College of Emergency Physicians [ACEP], 2017</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Alcohol, or ethanol, is a multisystem toxin and CNS depressant that causes drowsiness, impaired coordination, slurring of speech, sudden mood changes, aggression, belligerence, grandiosity, and uninhibited behavior. In excess, it can also cause stupor and eventually coma and death (i.e., alcohol poisoning). Frequently, underage minors and college students arrive at the ED with alcohol poisoning from binge drinking.</p>
<p class="indent">In the ED, the patient who is intoxicated with alcohol or who presents with alcohol poisoning is assessed for head injury, hypoglycemia (which mimics intoxication), and other health problems. Possible nursing diagnoses include impaired breathing associated with CNS depression and impaired impulse control associated with severe intoxication from alcohol.</p>
<p class="indent">Treatment involves detoxification of the acute poisoning, recovery, and rehabilitation. Commonly, the patient uses mechanisms of denial and defensiveness. The nurse should approach the patient in a nonjudgmental manner, using a firm, consistent, and accepting attitude. Speaking in a calm and slow manner is helpful because alcohol interferes with thought processes. If the patient appears intoxicated, hypoxia, hypovolemia, and neurologic impairment must be ruled out before it is assumed that the patient is intoxicated. Typically, a blood specimen is obtained for analysis of the blood alcohol level.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 2205</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page2206" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="2206">p. 2206</span></div>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt67-1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;67-1</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Emergency Management of Patients with Drug Overdose</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Drug</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Clinical Manifestations</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Therapeutic Management</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56born">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cocaine</p></td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Routes may include:</em></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Intranasally (&#x201C;snorting&#x201D;)&#x2014;inhaled into nostrils through straws</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>By smoking (&#x201C;freebasing&#x201D;)&#x2014;cocaine hydrochloride dissolved in ether to yield a pure cocaine alkaloid base (&#x201C;crack,&#x201D; &#x201C;rocks&#x201D;); smoking in a small pipe delivers large quantities of cocaine to lungs.</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>IV</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Polysubstance (cocaine and heroin)</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cocaine is a CNS stimulant that can cause:</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Increased heart rate and blood pressure</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hyperpyrexia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Seizures</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sluggish, dilated pupillary response</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Muscle rigidity</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Increased energy, agitation, aggression</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Ventricular arrhythmias</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Intense euphoria, then anxiety, sadness, insomnia, and sexual indifference</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cocaine hallucinations with delusions</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Psychosis with extreme paranoia and ideas of persecution</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hypervigilance</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Chronic psychotic symptoms may persist.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Overall psychotic symptoms are short-lived compared to methamphetamines</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Maintain airway and provide respiratory support.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Control seizures.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Monitor cardiovascular effects; have antiarrhythmic drugs and defibrillator available.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Treat for hyperthermia.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>If cocaine was ingested, evacuate stomach contents and use activated charcoal to treat. Whole bowel irrigation may be necessary to treat body packers (&#x201C;mules&#x201D;).</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Refer for psychiatric evaluation and treatment in an inpatient unit that eliminates access to the drug. Include drug rehabilitation counseling.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Opioids</strong></p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56aborn">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft">Heroin</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Opium or paregoric</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Morphine, codeine, semisynthetic derivatives: oxycodone, methadone, meperidine, tramadol, fentanyl</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft">Acute intoxication (overdose) can result in:</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pinpoint pupils (may be dilated with severe hypoxia)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreased blood pressure</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Marked respiratory depression/arrest</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pulmonary edema</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Stupor &#x2192; coma</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Seizures</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Fresh needle marks along course of any superficial vein</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Skin abscesses (from &#x201C;popping&#x201D;)</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Support respiratory and cardiovascular functions.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Establish IV lines; obtain blood for chemical and toxicologic analysis. Patient may be given bolus of glucose to eliminate possibility of hypoglycemia.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Administer narcotic antagonist (naloxone hydrochloride IV, IM) as prescribed to reverse severe respiratory depression and coma.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Continue to monitor level of responsiveness and respirations, pulse, and blood pressure. Duration of action of naloxone hydrochloride is shorter than that of heroin; repeated dosages may be necessary.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Send urine for analysis; opioids can be detected in urine.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Obtain an ECG.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Do not leave patient unattended; they may lapse back into coma rapidly. Clinical status may change from minute to minute. Hemodialysis may be indicated for severe drug intoxication. Activated charcoal may be considered if opioids were taken orally and if the patient is alert.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">8.</span>Monitor for pulmonary edema, which is frequently seen in patients who abuse/overdose on narcotics.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">9.</span>Refer patient for psychiatric and drug rehabilitation evaluation before discharge.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56born">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Barbiturates</strong></p></td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">Pentobarbital, secobarbital, amobarbital, gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB, &#x201C;liquid Ecstasy&#x201D;)</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Acute intoxication (may mimic alcohol intoxication):</em></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Respiratory depression</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Flushed face</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreased pulse rate; decreased blood pressure</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Increasing nystagmus (to vertical and horizontal gaze)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sluggish pupils</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Lack of convergence of eyes</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Depressed deep tendon reflexes</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreasing mental alertness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Difficulty in speaking</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Poor motor coordination and flaccid muscles</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Coma, death</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>GHB:</em></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sexual disinhibition</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Amnesia, myoclonus, agitation</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Overdoses when mixed with alcohol</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Maintain airway and provide respiratory support.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy is considered if there is any doubt about the adequacy of airway exchange.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">a.</span>Check airway frequently.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">b.</span>Perform suctioning as necessary.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Support cardiovascular and respiratory functions; most deaths result from respiratory depression or shock.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Start infusion through large-gauge needle or IV catheter to support blood pressure; coma and dehydration result in hypotension and respond to infusion of IV fluids with elevation of blood pressure.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Evacuate stomach contents or lavage if within 1 h of ingestion to prevent absorption; repeated doses of activated charcoal may be given.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Assist with hemodialysis for patient with severe overdose.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Maintain neurologic and vital sign flow sheet.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">8.</span>Patient awakening from overdose may demonstrate combative behavior.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">9.</span>Refer for psychiatric and drug rehabilitation consultation to evaluate suicide potential and drug abuse.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Inhalants</strong></p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56aborn">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft">Amyl nitrate</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Freon</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Propane</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Trichloroethylene</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Gasoline</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Perchloroethylene</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Toluene (metallic paint spray)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Helium</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Canned air</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hand sanitizer</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Routes may include:</em></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sniffing/snorting&#x2014;direct inhalation of fumes</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>&#x201C;Bagging&#x201D;&#x2014;sniff from a bag</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>&#x201C;Huffing&#x201D;&#x2014;sniff from a rag/cloth</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>&#x201C;Dusting&#x201D;&#x2014;direct spray into the nostrils</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2207" title="2207"></span>Effects mimic those of alcohol, with dizziness and imbalance:</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Euphoria, headache, disinhibition, altered level of consciousness to coma</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Renal, hepatic, and cardiac toxicity</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Aplastic anemia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Fetal growth retardation</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Respiratory depression, arrest from CNS depression</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Vasodilation</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nosebleeding</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Vertical and horizontal nystagmus</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Lack of convergence of eyes</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sluggish pupils</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Temperature fluctuations</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Circumoral red spots/rash</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Air embolus</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Provide airway support, ventilation, and oxygen.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Treat cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Provide advanced cardiac life support as needed.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Monitor for profound hypotension when amyl nitrate is combined with MDMA and sildenafil or with anesthetic agents.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Monitor for hypertension when volatile solvents are used.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" class="td56born">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Amphetamine-Type Drugs (pep pills, &#x201C;uppers,&#x201D; &#x201C;speed,&#x201D; &#x201C;crystal meth&#x201D;)</strong></p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">amphetamine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">dextroamphetamine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">methamphetamine (&#x201C;speed&#x201D;)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) (&#x201C;Ecstasy,&#x201D; &#x201C;Adam&#x201D;)<em><sup><a href="#fn30" id="ft30">a</a></sup></em></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">3,4-methylenedioxy-<em>N</em>-ethylamphetamine (MDEA) (&#x201C;Eve&#x201D;)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA); methylphenidate &#x201C;ice,&#x201D; &#x201C;rocks,&#x201D; &#x201C;crystal meth&#x201D;</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) or 4-methylmethcathinone; &#x201C;Bath salts&#x201D; (synthetic stimulant)</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nausea, vomiting, anorexia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Palpitations, tachycardia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Increased blood pressure</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Tachypnea, anxiety</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nervousness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Diaphoresis, mydriasis</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Repetitive or stereotyped behavior</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Irritability, insomnia, agitation</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Visual misperceptions, auditory hallucinations</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Fearfulness, anxiety, depression, hostility, paranoia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hyperactivity, rapid speech, euphoria, hyperalertness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreased inhibition</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Seizures, coma, hyperthermia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cardiovascular collapse</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Rhabdomyolysis</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>MDMA is both a hallucinogenic and a stimulant.</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>MDPV and 4-methylmethcathinone effects last &#x003E;24 h.</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Provide airway support, ventilation, cardiac monitoring; insert IV line.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Use GI evacuation in cases of oral overdose; activated charcoal, gastric lavage if within 1 h of ingestion.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Keep in calm, cool, quiet environment; elevated temperature potentiates amphetamine toxicity. Maintain normothermia, cooling the patient as necessary.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Administer small doses of diazepam (IV) or haloperidol as prescribed for CNS and muscular hyperactivity.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Administer appropriate pharmacologic therapy as prescribed for severe hypertension and ventricular arrhythmias.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Treat seizures with benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) as prescribed.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Treat sympathetic stimulation with beta-blocker agents as prescribed.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">8.</span>Try to communicate with patient if delusions or hallucinations are present.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">9.</span>Place in a protective environment (preferably psychiatric security room with video monitoring) to observe for suicide attempt.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">10.</span>Refer for psychiatric and drug rehabilitation evaluation.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Hallucinogens or Psychedelic-Type Drugs</strong></p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft">Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Phencyclidine HCl (PCP, &#x201C;angel dust&#x201D;)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Mescaline, psilocybin</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Ketamine (&#x201C;special K&#x201D;)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Synthetic cannabinoids (&#x201C;spice,&#x201D; &#x201C;incense,&#x201D; &#x201C;K2&#x201D;)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Butane honey oil (BHo)&#x2014;&#x201C;dabs,&#x201D; &#x201C;shatter&#x201D;</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nystagmus</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pupil dilation</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Mild hypertension</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Marked confusion bordering on panic</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Incoherence, hyperactivity</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Withdrawn</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Combative behavior; delirium, mania, self-injury (lasts 6&#x2013;12 h)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hallucinations, body image distortion</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hypertension, hyperthermia, acute kidney injury</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Flashback&#x2014;recurrence of LSD-like state without having taken the drug; may occur weeks or months after drug was taken</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Ketamine&#x2014;&#x201C;out-of-body&#x201D; experience; increased aggressiveness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Manufacturing can result in burns</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Evaluate and maintain patient&#x2019;s circulation, airway, and breathing.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Determine by urine or serum drug screen whether the patient has ingested hallucinogenic drug or has a toxic psychosis.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Try to communicate with and reassure the patient.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">a.</span>&#x201C;Talking down&#x201D; involves understanding the process through which the patient is proceeding and helping the patient overcome fears while establishing contact with reality.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">b.</span>Remind the patient that fear is common with this problem.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">c.</span>Reassure the patient that they are not losing their mind but are experiencing the effect of drugs and that this will wear off.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">d.</span>Instruct the patient to keep the eyes open; this reduces the intensity of reaction.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">e.</span>Reduce sensory stimuli by minimizing noise, lights, movement, tactile stimulation.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56a">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2208" title="2208"></span><span class="numah">4.</span>Sedate the patient as prescribed if hyperactivity cannot be controlled; diazepam or a barbiturate may be prescribed.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Search for evidence of trauma; patients who use hallucinogens have a tendency to &#x201C;act out&#x201D; their hallucinations.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Manage seizures with benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) as necessary.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Observe patient closely; patient&#x2019;s behavior may become hazardous. Have safety officers stationed near the patient&#x2019;s room.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">8.</span>Monitor for hypertensive crisis if patient has prolonged psychosis due to drug ingestion.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">9.</span>Place patient in a protected environment under proper medical supervision to prevent self-inflicted bodily harm.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><strong>Management for Phencyclidine Abuse</strong></p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Place patient in a calm, supportive environment to minimize stimuli; protect from self-injury.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Avoid talking down.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Do not leave patient unobserved. Treat symptoms as they occur.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">a.</span>Drug effects are unpredictable and prolonged.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">b.</span>Symptoms are likely to exacerbate; patient becomes out of control.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Refer all patients in this category for psychiatric and drug evaluation/rehabilitation.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" class="td56born">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Drugs Producing Sedation, Intoxication, or Psychological and Physical Dependence (nonbarbiturate sedatives)</strong></p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">diazepam</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">chlordiazepoxide</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">oxazepam</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">lorazepam</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">midazolam</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">flunitrazepam (&#x201C;roofies,&#x201D; &#x201C;date rape drug&#x201D;)<em><sup><a href="#fn30">a</a></sup></em></p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">Seizures, coma, circulatory collapse, death</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Acute intoxication:</em></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Respiratory depression</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Decreasing mental alertness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Confusion</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Slurred speech, decreased blood pressure</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Ataxia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Pulmonary edema</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Coma, death</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Flunitrazepam:</strong></p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Disinhibition with antegrade amnesia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Weakness and unsteadiness with impaired judgment</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Powerlessness</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Endotracheal tube is inserted as a precaution; use assisted ventilation to stabilize and correct respiratory depression. Observe for sudden apnea and laryngeal spasm.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Assess for hypotension.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">a.</span>Insert indwelling urinary catheter for patient who is comatose; decreased urinary volume is an index of reduced renal flow associated with reduced intravascular volume or vascular collapse.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle-a"><span class="numah">b.</span>Start volume expansion with saline or dextrose as prescribed.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Evacuate stomach contents; lavage (if within 1 h of ingestion); activated charcoal.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Start ECG monitoring. Observe for arrhythmias.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Administer flumazenil, a benzodiazepine antagonist (reversal agent).</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Refer patient for psychiatric evaluation (potential suicide intent).</p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Salicylate Poisoning</strong></p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft">Aspirin (present in compound analgesic tablets)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Toxic levels (150&#x2013;200 mg/kg body weight)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Chronic toxicity (occurs in older adults due to decreased kidney function)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Long-term intoxication (&#x003E;100 mg/kg/day for more than 2 days)</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Restlessness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Tinnitus, deafness</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Blurring of vision</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hyperpnea</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Hyperpyrexia</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Sweating</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Epigastric pain, vomiting</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Dehydration</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Disorientation, coma</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Cardiovascular collapse</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Coagulopathy</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Treat respiratory depression.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Induce gastric emptying by lavage (if within 1 h after ingestion).</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Give activated charcoal to adsorb aspirin.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Support patient with IV infusions as prescribed to establish hydration and correct electrolyte imbalances, including administration of sodium bicarbonate.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Enhance elimination of salicylates as directed by forced diuresis, alkalinization of urine, peritoneal dialysis, or hemodialysis, according to severity of intoxication.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Monitor serum salicylate level for efficacy of treatment.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Administer specific prescribed pharmacologic agent for bleeding and other problems.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">8.</span>Recognize that concretions formed in the gut may result in prolonged exposure as they are digested.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">9.</span>Refer patient for psychiatric evaluation (potential suicide intent).</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">10.</span>Monitor thromboelastography for platelet function.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2209" title="2209"></span>Acetaminophen (present in prescription and nonprescription analgesics, antipyretics, and cold remedies)</p>
<p class="TABLEpBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Toxic levels (&#x2265;140 mg/kg body weight)</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft">Lethargy to encephalopathy and death</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">GI upset, diaphoresis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Right upper quadrant pain</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Abnormal liver function tests, prolonged prothrombin time, increased bilirubin, disseminated intravascular coagulation</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hepatomegaly leading to liver failure</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Metabolic acidosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypoglycemia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Stage I&#x2014;within 24 h; GI irritation, possible metabolic acidosis and coma if severe ingestion</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Stage II&#x2014;24&#x2013;48 h; monitor liver and coagulation studies.</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Stage III&#x2014;after 48 h; hepatic encephalopathy/jaundice, vomiting, right upper quadrant pain, coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, acute kidney injury</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Maintain airway.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Obtain acetaminophen level.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Laboratory studies&#x2014;liver function tests, prothrombin time/partial thromboplastin time, complete blood count, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Lavage (if within 1 h after ingestion); activated charcoal.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Prepare for possible hemodialysis, which clears acetaminophen but does not halt liver damage.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Administer NAC as soon as possible. NAC replenishes essential liver enzymes and requires a total of 18 doses every 4 h. Charcoal absorbs NAC; do not administer together. Repeat NAC dose if patient vomits.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">7.</span>Refer patient for psychiatric evaluation (potential suicide intent).</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56born">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Tricyclic Antidepressants</strong></p></td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td>
<td class="td56born">&#x00A0;</td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">amitriptyline</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">doxepin</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">nortriptyline</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">imipramine</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="tbodyleft">Arrhythmia: ventricular fibrillation/tachycardia, sinus tachycardia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypotension</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Pulmonary edema, hypoxemia, acidosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Confusion, agitation, coma</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Visual hallucinations</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Clonus, tremors, hyperactive reflexes, nystagmus, myoclonic jerking</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Seizures</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Blurred vision, flushing, hyperthermia</p></td>
<td class="td56">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Provide airway support, ventilation, cardiac monitoring; insert IV line with normal saline solution.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>If within 1&#x2013;2 h after overdose, insert a nasogastric tube and instill activated charcoal every 4 h &#x00D7; 3.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Administer a sodium bicarbonate drip to decrease arrhythmias; the alkaline environment increases the protein binding of the metabolite. Synchronized cardioversion may be indicated with some arrhythmias refractory to sodium bicarbonate. Torsades de pointes should be treated with IV magnesium sulfate.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">4.</span>Administer vasopressors.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">5.</span>Manage seizure activity with benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) as necessary.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">6.</span>Refer patient for psychiatric evaluation for potential suicide intent and evaluation of medication regimen for effectiveness.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and Other Antidepressants</strong></p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft">trazodone</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">fluoxetine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">paroxetine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">sertraline</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">venlafaxine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">escitalopram</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">bupropion</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="tbodyleft">Decreased level of consciousness, confusion</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Respiratory depression</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increased heart rate</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Serotonin syndrome may occur if the SSRI was taken in conjunction with dextromethorphan or meperidine</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Agitation, seizures</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyperthermia, diaphoresis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypertension, headache, shivering, &#x201C;goose flesh,&#x201D; cardiac arrhythmias, loss of consciousness</p></td>
<td class="td56aborn">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Administer activated charcoal with possibly whole bowel irrigation if a sustained-release medication was taken.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Use seizure precautions and administer benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam) as prescribed.</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td56a">
<p class="tbodyleft"><strong>Anabolic Steroids</strong></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">&#x201C;roids,&#x201D; &#x201C;juice,&#x201D; methandrostenolone, stanozolol, nandrolone</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Synthetic testosterone</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="white1"></p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Increase in LDL, decrease in HDL</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Alter carbohydrate metabolism</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hyponatremia, hypokalemia</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Hypocalcemia/osteoporosis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Mood swings/violent behaviors</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Invincibility, depression, potential for suicide attempts</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Memory loss, cognitive disability</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Immunosuppression</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Used to bulk up muscles, so skeletal muscle hypertrophy is a common manifestation.</p></td>
<td class="td56a">
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">1.</span>Provide supportive therapy appropriate to patient&#x2019;s emotional manifestations.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">2.</span>Protect the patient from self-harm/harming others.</p>
<p class="TABLEpNL1Middle"><span class="numah">3.</span>Encourage the patient to stop use; refer patient for psychiatric evaluation.</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="TABLEpLEGEND">&#x2192;, precedes; CNS, central nervous system; ECG, electrocardiogram; GI, gastrointestinal; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; NAC, N-acetylcysteine; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.</p>
<p class="tablesource"><em><sup><a href="#ft30" id="fn30">a</a></sup></em>Polydrug use at &#x201C;rave clubs&#x201D; frequently involves MDMA, alcohol, amphetamines, LSD, and sometimes dextromethorphan. Terms such as &#x201C;Ecstasy&#x201D; may refer to flunitrazepam, GHB, ephedrine, and/or caffeine, in addition to MDMA.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Emergency Nurses Association (ENA). (2020a). <em>Sheehy&#x2019;s manual of emergency care</em> (8th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby; Tintinalli, J. E., Stapczyski, J. S., Ma, O. J., et al. (2020). <em>Tintinalli&#x2019;s emergency medicine manual</em> (9th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.</p>
</div>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 2209</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page2210" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="2210">p. 2210</span></div>
<p class="indent">If drowsy, the patient should be allowed to sleep off the state of alcoholic intoxication. During this time, maintenance of a patent airway and observation for symptoms of CNS depression are essential. The patient should be kept warm with blankets. On the other hand, if the patient is noisy or belligerent, sedation may be necessary. If sedation is used, the patient should be monitored carefully for hypotension and decreased LOC.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition, the patient is examined for alcohol withdrawal delirium and for injuries and organic disease (such as head injury, seizures, pulmonary infections, hypoglycemia, and nutritional deficiencies) that may be masked by alcoholic intoxication. People with alcoholism suffer more injuries than the general population. Acute alcohol intoxication is the cause of trauma for many patients without alcoholism as well. Pulmonary infections are also more common in patients with alcoholism, resulting from respiratory depression, an impaired defense system, and a tendency toward aspiration of gastric contents. The patient may show little increase in temperature or WBC count. The patient may be hospitalized or admitted to a detoxification center in an effort to examine problems underlying SUD (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>