<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3187">Violence in the Emergency Department</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Not only do ED staff members encounter patients who may be violent because of the effects of substance use disorder (SUD), injury, or other emergencies, they may also encounter other violent situations. Patients and families waiting for assistance may be emotionally volatile. Often, ED waiting rooms are the sites where feelings of dissatisfaction, fear, and anger are channeled violently. EDs assign security officers to the area and have installed silent alarm systems or metal detectors to identify weapons in order to protect patients, families, and staff. Safety is the first priority.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients and family members under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol, or who may have psychiatric disorders, including delirium or dementia, or who may be influenced by social situations such as gang membership, are at risk for committing a violent act, whether intentional or not (CDC, 2019a). The environment of the ED, including being subjected to long wait times and at times crowded conditions, may also increase their risk of committing violent events. Physical threats are most often accompanied by verbal abuse, which is the most common type of violence (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Copeland &#x0026; Henry, 2017</a>). Although not a typical occurrence, a patient or family member may come to the ED armed. To avoid angry confrontations, members of gangs and families who are feuding need to be separated in the ED, in the waiting room, and later in the inpatient nursing unit. Nurses and other personnel must be prepared to deal with these circumstances. The ED should be locked against entry if security is questionable.</p>
<p class="indent">Patients who are violent or potentially violent must be vigilantly monitored by the ED staff. Care must be taken to avoid injury. Patients from prison and those who are under guard need to be handcuffed to the bed and appropriately assessed to ensure the safety of hospital staff and other patients. The emergency nurse must understand how to employ safe use of restraints. The Joint Commission has strict standards regarding documentation of the reason, monitoring for safety, and ensuring the dignity of the patient who is restrained. Precautions to be taken to avoid injury include the following situations (ENA 2020a; Ziaei, Massoudifar, Rajabpour-Sanati, et al., 2018):</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>For prisoners, the hand or ankle restraint (handcuff) is never released, and a guard is always present in the room.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>A mask can be placed on the patient to prevent spitting or biting, if a mask is not already being used.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Nonrestraint techniques should be tried when possible&#x2014;for example, talking with the patient, minimizing environmental stimulation.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Physical restraints are used on any patient who is violent only as needed and, if used, should be humanely and professionally given; nonetheless, the staff should be cognizant that the patient could head-butt, even if restrained.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Distance should be maintained from the patient to avoid grabbing; staff should not wear items that can be grabbed by the patient, such as dangling jewelry and stethoscopes. Furthermore, distance should be maintained between the patient and the door so that an escape route for the staff member is preserved.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Objects should not be left within patient reach; even an intravenous (IV) line spike can become a tool of violence if the patient is determined.</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Courses on safety (de-escalation and physical restraint techniques) assist the staff with preparing for various violent situations.</p>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 2181</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page2182" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="2182">p. 2182</span></div>
<p class="indent">In the case of gunfire in the ED, self-protection is a priority. There is no advantage to protecting others if health care providers are injured. Security officers and police must gain control of the situation first, and then care is provided to the injured.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>