<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3201">Assess and Intervene</h4>
<p class="nonindent">For the patient assigned to an urgent or higher triage category, stabilization, provision of critical treatments, and prompt transfer to the appropriate setting (intensive care unit, operating room, general care unit) are the priorities of emergency care. Although treatment is initiated in the ED, ongoing definitive treatment of the underlying problem is provided in other settings, and the sooner the patient is stabilized and moved to that area, the better the outcome.</p>
<p class="indent">A systematic approach to effectively establishing and treating health priorities is the primary survey/secondary survey approach. The <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;primary survey:&lt;/b&gt; an assessment of the patient triaged to the emergent or resuscitation category that focuses on stabilizing life-threatening conditions; uses the mnemonic ABCDE, which stands for &lt;em&gt;A&lt;/em&gt;irway, &lt;em&gt;B&lt;/em&gt;reathing, &lt;em&gt;C&lt;/em&gt;irculation, &lt;em&gt;D&lt;/em&gt;isability, and &lt;em&gt;E&lt;/em&gt;xposure">primary survey</button></strong> focuses on stabilizing life-threatening conditions. The ED staff work collaboratively and follow the ABCDE (<em>A</em>irway, <em>B</em>reathing, <em>C</em>irculation, <em>D</em>isability, <em>E</em>xposure) method:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Establish a patent airway.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Provide adequate ventilation, employing resuscitation measures when necessary. Patients who have experienced trauma must have the cervical spine protected and chest injuries assessed first, immediately after the airway is established.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Evaluate and restore cardiac output by controlling hemorrhage, preventing and treating shock, and maintaining or restoring effective circulation. This includes the prevention and management of hypothermia. In addition, peripheral pulses are examined, and any immediate closed reductions of fractures or dislocations are performed if an extremity is pulseless.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Determine neurologic disability by assessing neurologic function using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (see <a href="c63.xhtml">Chapter 63</a>, <a href="c63-sec02.xhtml#ct63-4">Chart 63-4</a>) and a motor and sensory evaluation of the spine (see <a href="c60.xhtml">Chapter 60</a>, <a href="c60-sec01.xhtml#ff60-9">Fig. 60-9</a>). A quick neurologic assessment may be performed using the AVPU mnemonic:</p>
<p class="BL2Middle"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1a">&#x2022;</span></span><em>A</em>&#x2014;alert. Is the patient alert and responsive?</p>
<p class="BL2Middle"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1a">&#x2022;</span></span><em>V</em>&#x2014;verbal. Does the patient respond to verbal stimuli?</p>
<p class="BL2Middle"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1a">&#x2022;</span></span><em>P</em>&#x2014;pain. Does the patient respond only to painful stimuli?</p>
<p class="BL2Middle"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1a">&#x2022;</span></span><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2187" title="2187"></span><em>U</em>&#x2014;unresponsive. Is the patient unresponsive to all stimuli, including pain?</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Undress the patient quickly but gently so that any wounds or areas of injury are identified; this may entail cutting away articles of clothing (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">After these priorities have been addressed, the ED team proceeds with the <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;secondary survey:&lt;/b&gt; an assessment of the patient triaged to the emergent or resuscitation category that commences after the primary survey is completed and life-threatening insults addressed; includes obtaining vital signs, completing a head-to-toe examination, and obtaining the patient&#x2019;s pertinent medical-surgical history, including the history of the current event">secondary survey</button></strong>. This includes the following:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Complete health history, including the history of the current event</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Head-to-toe assessment (includes a reassessment of airway and breathing parameters and vital signs)</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Diagnostic and laboratory testing</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Insertion or application of monitoring devices such as ECG electrodes, arterial lines, or urinary catheters</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Splinting of suspected fractures</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Cleansing, closure, and dressing of wounds</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Performance of other necessary interventions based on the patient&#x2019;s condition</p>
<p class="indent">Once the patient has been assessed, stabilized, and tested, appropriate medical and nursing diagnoses are formulated, initial important treatment is started, and plans for the proper disposition of the patient are made (ENA, 2020a). Many emergent and urgent conditions and priority emergency interventions are discussed in detail in the remaining sections of this chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition to the management of the illness or injury, the ED nurse must also focus on providing comfort and emotional support to the patient and family. Included in this is pain management. Effective pain management must be instituted early and should include rapid-acting agents that result in minimal sedation so that the patient can continue to interact with the staff for ongoing assessment. Moderate sedation can help facilitate short procedures in the ED; the patient will not remember the procedure later. The patient is closely monitored during the procedure and then rapidly awakens when it is complete (see <a href="c15.xhtml">Chapter 15</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">It is essential that family crisis intervention services are available for families of patients in the ED. Even if a patient&#x2019;s condition is not emergent, the situation may be perceived as such by the family. Every family needs attention and support. The chaplain and social worker may be available to assist with interventions.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>