<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3194">Discharge Planning</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Before discharge, instructions for continuing care are given to the patient and to the family or significant others, if possible. A variety of formats are used including verbal, written, or video instructions; research findings suggest that video instructions are well received by patients and family members (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4678">Wilkin, 2020</a>). Many EDs have preprinted standard instruction sheets for the more common conditions (e.g., concussion), which can then be individualized. Discharge instructions should be available in commonly used languages. A language interpreter should be used as necessary to provide instructions in any format.</p>
<p class="indent">Instructions should include information about prescribed medications, treatments, diet, activity, and when to contact a health care provider or schedule follow-up appointments. Discharge planning is the &#x201C;teachable moment&#x201D; for the patient, providing the opportunity to present injury prevention or smoking cessation strategies, alcohol counseling opportunities, and more. It is imperative that instructions are written legibly, use simple language, and are clear in their important points. When providing discharge instructions, the nurse also considers any special needs the patient may have related to hearing or visual impairments. Alternative formats of instruction (e.g., large print, Braille, audiotape, online videoclips) should be available to meet the needs of patients with hearing or visual impairments.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>