<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s3255">SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER (SUD)</h4>
<p class="nonindent">SUD is the misuse of specific substances, such as drugs or alcohol, to alter mood or behavior. Drug abuse is the use of drugs for other than legitimate medical purposes. People who abuse drugs often take a variety of drugs simultaneously (such as alcohol, barbiturates, opioids, and tranquilizers), and the combination may have additive and addictive effects.</p>
<p class="indent">&#x201C;Rave parties&#x201D; are large-scale parties attended by hundreds of people involved in illicit drug use. At these events, one of the most commonly used drugs is 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), or Ecstasy, a methamphetamine-based drug that users believe produces a &#x201C;harmless high.&#x201D; ED nurses should be aware of rave parties in their geographic area so that they can prepare for a potential influx of patients who abuse this drug (ENA, 2020a). Others may combine Ecstasy with sildenafil; this drug combination is nicknamed &#x201C;sextasy.&#x201D;</p>
<p class="indent">Spice is a synthetic cannabinoid sold commercially as a smoking mixture under the names &#x201C;spice,&#x201D; &#x201C;incense,&#x201D; or &#x201C;K2.&#x201D; Its chemical structure and effects are similar to marijuana, targeting the same receptor sites in the brain. Spice is sold with variable concentrations and unregulated potency (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4661">National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Bath salts are synthetic stimulants similar to Ecstasy known as &#x201C;mephedrone,&#x201D; &#x201C;drone,&#x201D; or &#x201C;MCAT.&#x201D; Their effects are similar to amphetamines, MDMA, and cocaine. Although bath salts are most commonly swallowed or snorted, they may also be smoked or injected; the method of intake affects the severity and duration of effects (<a href="c67-sec41.xhtml#tt67-1">Table 67-1</a>). The structural formula 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) is the most common type of bath salt abused (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Abuse of various inhalants (see <a href="c67-sec41.xhtml#tt67-1">Table 67-1</a>) has also increased in popularity; these products generally result more often in cravings than withdrawal when their use is stopped. The method of inhalation varies with the product chosen and requires several deep inhalations to reach euphoria. Methods include sniffing or snorting by directly inhaling the fumes. &#x201C;Bagging&#x201D; (sniffing from a bag) or &#x201C;huffing&#x201D; (sniffing from a rag or cloth) provide the greatest concentration; &#x201C;dusting&#x201D; is another method that delivers the inhalant by directly spraying it into the nostrils. Long-term use results in cortical atrophy and brain stem dysfunction, in addition to cardiomyopathy and emphysema like abnormalities of the lung. Significant others or parents may report that the patient has had poor school or work performance or attendance, weight loss, poor hygiene, fatigue, nosebleeds, and decreased appetite (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4660">National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">Clinical manifestations vary with the substance used, but the underlying principles of management are essentially the same. <a href="c67-sec41.xhtml#tt67-1">Table 67-1</a> identifies commonly abused drugs, listing their clinical manifestations and therapeutic management. Treatment goals for a patient with a drug overdose are to support the respiratory and cardiovascular functions, to enhance clearance of the agent, and to provide for safety of the patient and staff. People who abuse IV/injection drugs are at increased risk for HIV infection, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, hepatitis B and C, and tetanus.</p>
<p class="indent">Cannabis remains popular, available, and in some states, is now legal. A newer method of cannabis abuse is butane honey oil (BHO) or &#x201C;dabs.&#x201D; BHO is created at home by heating cannabis with butane to strip the chemical from the plant, which is then heated further to remove the butane. It may be further distilled to &#x201C;shatter&#x201D; by being placed in a vacuum to remove any residual butane. The product results in a &#x201C;dab&#x201D; which can then be inhaled. Butane in the presence of an ignition source can result in explosion and fire resulting in chemical and thermal burns (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4662">National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2019</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>