<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3184">Documentation of Consent and Privacy</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Consent to examine and treat the patient is part of the ED record. The patient needs to give consent for invasive procedures (e.g., angiography, lumbar puncture) unless they are unconscious or in a critical condition and unable to make decisions. If the patient is unconscious and brought to the ED without family or friends, this fact must be documented. Monitoring of the patient&#x2019;s condition, as well as all instituted treatments and the times at which they were performed, must be documented. After treatment, a notation is made on the record about the patient&#x2019;s condition, response to the treatment, and condition at discharge or transfer and about instructions given to the patient and family for follow-up care.</p>
<p class="indent">The patient is also provided with a statement of the privacy policy of the health care agency, according to federal law. Patients involved in violent events can be provided with an alias, and access to the electronic health record (EHR) is limited to protect the privacy of the patient. A patient may also request extra privacy by limiting access to their room and by choosing not to receive phone calls, mail, flowers, other gifts, or certain visitors. These practices relate to the federally mandated privacy policy stipulated in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).</p>
<p class="indent">According to the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA), every ED with a Medicare provider agreement must perform a medical screening examination on all patients arriving with an emergency medical complaint if their acute signs and symptoms could result in serious injury or death if left untreated. EDs are also required to provide treatment aimed at stabilizing each patient&#x2019;s condition. If the patient must be transferred to another facility, the patient&#x2019;s consent for transfer should be obtained, if possible. In addition, acceptance by the receiving facility and primary provider must be obtained, and an appropriate method of transfer for the patient should be secured. Documentation of assessment and treatment must be sent with the patient upon transfer (ENA, 2020a).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>