<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4a" id="s3210">WOUNDS</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Wounds involving injury to soft tissues can vary from minor tears to severe crushing injuries. The types of wounds that may occur are defined in <a href="#ct67-3">Chart 67-3</a>. The main goal of treatment is to restore the physical integrity and function of the injured tissue while minimizing scarring and preventing infection. Proper documentation of the characteristics of the wound, using precise descriptions and correct terminology, is essential. Such information may be needed in the future for forensic evidence. Photographs are helpful because they provide an accurate, visible depiction of the wound. Photographs <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2191" title="2191"></span>also become important for exigent wounds (i.e., wounds that will eventually heal). Patients experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV) or trauma may need the photographs later to visually describe the extent of injury.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct67-3"><strong>Chart 67-3</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong><strong>Definition of Terms:</strong> Wounds</strong></p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Abrasion:</strong> denuded skin</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Avulsion:</strong> tearing away of tissue from supporting structures</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Cut:</strong> incision of the skin with well-defined edges, usually longer than deep</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Ecchymosis/contusion:</strong> blood trapped under the surface of the skin</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Hematoma:</strong> tumorlike mass of blood trapped under the skin</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Laceration:</strong> skin tear with irregular edges and vein bridging</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Patterned:</strong> wound representing the outline of the object (e.g., steering wheel) causing the wound</p>
<p class="BoxUL1Middle"><strong>Stab:</strong> incision of the skin with well-defined edges, usually caused by a sharp instrument; a stab wound is typically deeper than long</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Determining <em>when</em> and <em>how</em> the wound occurred is important because a treatment delay increases infection risk. Using aseptic technique, the clinician inspects the wound to determine the extent of damage to underlying structures or the presence of a foreign body. Sensory, motor, and vascular function is evaluated for changes that might indicate complications.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3211">Management</h5>
<h6 class="h6">Wound Cleansing</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Hair around the wound may be clipped (only as directed) if it is anticipated that the hair will interfere with wound closure. Typically, the area around the wound is cleansed with normal saline solution or a polymer agent (e.g., Shur-Clens). The antibacterial agent povidone-iodine should not be allowed to get deep into the wound without thorough rinsing. Povidone-iodine is used only for the initial cleansing because it injures exposed and healthy tissue, resulting in further tissue damage (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">If indicated, the area is infiltrated with a local intradermal anesthetic through the wound margins or by regional block. Patients with soft tissue injuries usually have localized pain at the site of injury. The nurse then assists with cleaning and d&#x00E9;briding the wound. The wound is irrigated gently and copiously with sterile isotonic saline solution to remove surface dirt. Devitalized tissue and foreign matter are removed because they impede healing and may promote infection. Any small bleeding vessels are clamped, tied, or cauterized. After wound treatment, a nonadherent dressing is applied to protect the wound and to serve as a splint and as a reminder to the patient that the area is injured.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Primary Closure</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The decision to suture a wound depends on the nature of the wound, the time since the injury was sustained, the degree of contamination, and the vascularity of tissues. If primary closure is indicated, the wound is sutured or stapled, usually by the emergency provider, with the patient receiving either local anesthesia or moderate sedation (see <a href="c15.xhtml">Chapter 15</a>). Wound closure begins when subcutaneous fat is brought together loosely with a few sutures to close off the dead space. The subcuticular layer is then closed, and finally the epidermis is closed. Sutures are placed near the wound edge, with the skin edges leveled carefully to promote optimal healing. Instead of sutures, sterile strips of reinforced microporous tape or a bonding agent (skin glue) may be used to close clean, superficial wounds (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h6 class="h6">Delayed Primary Closure</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Delayed primary closure may be indicated if tissue has been lost or there is a high potential for infection. A thin layer of gauze (to ensure drainage and prevent pooling of exudate), covered by an occlusive dressing, may be used. The wound is splinted in a functional position to prevent motion and decrease the possibility of contracture.</p>
<p class="indent">If there are no signs of suppuration (formation of purulent drainage), the wound may be sutured (with the patient receiving a local anesthetic). The use of antibiotic agents to prevent infection depends on factors such as how the injury occurred, the age of the wound, and the risk of contamination. The site is immobilized and elevated to limit accumulation of fluid in the interstitial spaces of the wound.</p>
<p class="indent">Tetanus prophylaxis is given as prescribed, based on the condition of the wound and the patient&#x2019;s immunization status. If the patient&#x2019;s last tetanus booster was given more than 5 years ago, or if the patient&#x2019;s immunization status is unknown, a tetanus booster must be given (ENA, 2020a). The patient is educated about signs and symptoms of infection and is instructed to contact the primary provider or clinic if there is sudden or persistent pain, fever or chills, bleeding, rapid swelling, foul odor, drainage, or redness surrounding the wound.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>