<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3234">Hypothermia</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Hypothermia is a condition in which the core (internal) temperature is 35&#x00B0;C (95&#x00B0;F) or less as a result of exposure to cold or an inability to maintain body temperature in the absence of low ambient temperatures. Urban hypothermia (extreme exposure to cold in an urban setting) is associated with a high mortality rate; older adults, infants, people with concurrent illnesses, and those who are homeless are particularly susceptible. Alcohol ingestion increases susceptibility because it causes systemic vasodilation. Some medications (e.g., phenothiazines) or medical conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, spinal cord injury) decrease the ability to shiver, hampering the body&#x2019;s innate ability to generate body heat. Fatigue and sleep deprivation are also associated with the development of hypothermia. Heat loss of 2% is normal but increases with exposure. Wet clothing accelerates heat loss, and immersion in cold water increases heat loss by 25% (ENA, 2020a). Victims of trauma are also at risk for hypothermia resulting from treatment with cold fluids, unwarmed oxygen, and exposure during examination. The patient may also have frostbite, but hypothermia takes precedence in treatment.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3235">Assessment and Diagnostic Findings</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Hypothermia leads to physiologic changes in all organ systems. There is progressive deterioration, with apathy, poor judgment, ataxia, dysarthria, drowsiness, pulmonary edema, acid&#x2013;base abnormalities, coagulopathy, and eventual coma. Shivering may be suppressed at a temperature of less than 32.2&#x00B0;C (90&#x00B0;F), because the body&#x2019;s self-warming mechanisms become ineffective. Cardiac output and blood pressure may be so weak that peripheral pulses become undetectable. Cardiac arrhythmias may also occur. Other physiologic abnormalities include hypoxemia and acidosis (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3236">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Management consists of removal of wet clothing, continuous monitoring, rewarming, and supportive care.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Monitoring</h6>
<p class="nonindent">The CABs of basic life support are a priority. The patient&#x2019;s vital signs, CVP, urine output, arterial blood gas levels, blood chemistry determinations (blood urea nitrogen [BUN], creatinine, glucose, electrolytes), and chest x-rays are evaluated frequently. Core body temperature is monitored with an esophageal, bladder, or rectal thermistor. Continuous ECG monitoring is performed, because cold-induced myocardial irritability leads to conduction disturbances, especially ventricular fibrillation. An arterial line is inserted and maintained to record blood pressure and to facilitate blood sampling.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Rewarming</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Rewarming methods include active internal (core) rewarming and passive (spontaneous) or active external rewarming (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Higginson, 2018</a>).</p>
<p class="indent"><em>Active internal rewarming</em> methods are used for moderate to severe hypothermia (less than 28&#x00B0;C to 32.2&#x00B0;C [82.5&#x00B0;F to 90&#x00B0;F]) and include cardiopulmonary bypass, warm fluid administration, warmed humidified oxygen by ventilator, and warmed peritoneal lavage. Monitoring for ventricular fibrillation as the patient&#x2019;s temperature increases from 31&#x00B0;C to 32&#x00B0;C (88&#x00B0;F to 90&#x00B0;F) is essential.</p>
<p class="indent"><em>Passive or active external rewarming</em> is used for mild hypothermia (32.2&#x00B0;C to 35&#x00B0;C [90&#x00B0;F to 95&#x00B0;F]). Passive external rewarming uses over-the-bed heaters to the extremities and increases blood flow to the acidotic, anaerobic extremities. The cold blood from peripheral tissues has high lactic acid levels. As this blood returns to the core, it causes a significant drop in the core temperature (i.e., core temperature afterdrop) and can potentially cause cardiac arrhythmias and electrolyte disturbances. Active external rewarming uses forced-air warming blankets. Care must be taken to prevent <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2199" title="2199"></span>extremity burn from these devices, because the patient may not have effective sensation to feel the burn.</p>
<h6 class="h6">Supportive Care</h6>
<p class="nonindent">Supportive care during rewarming includes the following as directed (ENA, 2020a):</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>External cardiac compression (typically performed only as directed in patients with temperatures higher than 31&#x00B0;C [88&#x00B0;F])</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Defibrillation of ventricular fibrillation. A patient whose temperature is less than 32&#x00B0;C (90&#x00B0;F) experiences spontaneous ventricular fibrillation if moved or touched. Defibrillation is ineffective in patients with temperatures lower than 31&#x00B0;C (88&#x00B0;F); therefore, the patient must be rewarmed first.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Mechanical ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and heated humidified oxygen to maintain tissue oxygenation</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Administration of warmed IV fluids to correct hypotension and to maintain urine output and core rewarming, as described previously</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Administration of sodium bicarbonate to correct metabolic acidosis if necessary</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Administration of antiarrhythmic medications</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Insertion of an indwelling urinary catheter to monitor urinary output and kidney function</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>