<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3250">Carbon Monoxide Poisoning</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Carbon monoxide poisoning may occur as a result of industrial or household incidents or attempted suicide. It is the most common cause of fatality from poisoning and is frequently under-reported to poison control centers or misdiagnosed (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>). Carbon monoxide exerts its toxic effect by binding to circulating hemoglobin and thereby reducing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. Hemoglobin absorbs carbon monoxide 200 times more readily than it absorbs oxygen. Carbon monoxide&#x2013;bound hemoglobin, called <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;carboxyhemoglobin:&lt;/b&gt; a compound of carbon monoxide (CO) and hemoglobin formed in the blood with exposure to CO">carboxyhemoglobin</button></strong>, does not transport oxygen.</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3251">Clinical Manifestations</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Because the CNS has a critical need for oxygen, CNS symptoms predominate with carbon monoxide toxicity. A person with carbon monoxide poisoning may appear intoxicated (from cerebral hypoxia). Other signs and symptoms include headache, muscular weakness, palpitation, dizziness, and confusion, which can progress rapidly to coma. Skin color, which can range from pink or cherry-red to cyanotic and pale, is not a reliable sign. Pulse oximetry may reveal a high hemoglobin <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2204" title="2204"></span>saturation, which may be deceiving, since the hemoglobin molecule is saturated with carbon monoxide rather than oxygen (ENA, 2020a).</p>
<h5 class="h5" id="s3252">Management</h5>
<p class="nonindent">Exposure to carbon monoxide requires immediate treatment. Goals of management are to reverse cerebral and myocardial hypoxia and to hasten elimination of carbon monoxide. Whenever a patient inhales a poison, the following general measures apply:</p>
<p class="BL1Firsta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Move the patient to fresh air immediately, if possible.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Open all doors and windows.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Loosen all tight clothing.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Initiate traditional cardiopulmonary resuscitation.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Prevent chilling; wrap the patient in blankets.</p>
<p class="BL1Middlea"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Keep the patient as quiet as possible.</p>
<p class="BL1Lasta"><span class="bull1a"><span class="listbl1">&#x2022;</span></span>Do not give alcohol in any form or permit the patient to smoke.</p>
<p class="indent">In addition, for the patient with carbon monoxide poisoning, carboxyhemoglobin levels are analyzed on arrival at the ED and before treatment with oxygen if possible. To reverse hypoxia and accelerate the elimination of carbon monoxide, 100% oxygen is given at atmospheric or preferably hyperbaric pressures. Oxygen is given until the carboxyhemoglobin level is less than 5%. The patient is monitored continuously. Psychoses, spastic paralysis, ataxia, visual disturbances, and deterioration of mental status and behavior may persist after resuscitation and may be symptoms of permanent brain damage (<a href="c67-sec51.xhtml#bib4698">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">When unintentional carbon monoxide poisoning occurs, the health department should be contacted so that the dwelling or building in question can be inspected. A psychiatric consultation is warranted if it has been determined that the poisoning was a suicide attempt.</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>