<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#x0026; Suddarth&#x2019;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<section epub:type="chapter" title="Cell Structure and Function">
<div id="main_container">
<header>
<h1 id="ch1" class="chapter_name"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2179" title="2179"></span><span class="chapter_name">CHAPTER 67</span></h1>
<h2 class="chapter_title">Emergency Nursing</h2>
</header>
<h3 class="h3">LEARNING OUTCOMES</h3>
<div class="objectives">
<p class="objectivespTOPICpPARA"><em>On completion of this chapter, the learner will be able to:</em></p>
<ol class="obj"><li><span>Describe emergency care as a collaborative, holistic approach that ideally includes the patient, the family, and significant others.</span></li>
<li><span>Identify the priorities of care for the patient with an emergency disorder, particularly the patient with multiple system injuries.</span></li>
<li><span>Compare and contrast the emergency management of patients with heat stroke, frostbite, and hypothermia.</span></li>
<li><span>Specify the similarities and differences of the emergency management of patients with swallowed or inhaled poisons, skin contamination, and food poisoning.</span></li>
<li><span>Explain the emergency management of patients with drug overdose, those with acute alcohol intoxication, those who have been sexually assaulted, and those who have been victims of human trafficking.</span></li>
<li><span>Differentiate between the emergency care of patients who are overactive, those who are violent, those who are depressed, and those who are suicidal.</span></li></ol>
</div>
<h3 class="h3">NURSING CONCEPTS</h3>
<div class="overview">
<p class="overviewpUL1First">Addiction</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Assessment</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Behaviors</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Medical Emergencies</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Oxygenation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Middle">Thermoregulation</p>
<p class="overviewpUL1Last">Violence</p></div>
<div id="keyword">
<h3 class="h3">GLOSSARY</h3>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">antivenin:</span> antitoxin manufactured from venom of poisonous snakes to assist the patient&#x2019;s immune system response to envenomation</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">carboxyhemoglobin:</span> hemoglobin that is bound to carbon monoxide and therefore is unable to bind with oxygen, resulting in hypoxemia</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">corrosive poison:</span> alkaline or acidic agent; causes tissue destruction after contact</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">cricothyroidotomy:</span> surgical opening of the cricothyroid membrane to obtain an airway that is maintained with a tracheostomy or endotracheal tube</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">envenomation:</span> injection of a poisonous material by sting, spine, bite, or other means</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">fasciotomy:</span> surgical incision of the extremity to the level of the fascia to relieve pressure and restore neurovascular function to the extremity</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">multiple trauma:</span> trauma caused by a single catastrophic event that causes life-threatening injuries to at least two distinct organs or organ systems</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">primary survey:</span> an assessment of the patient triaged to the emergent or resuscitation category that focuses on stabilizing life-threatening conditions; uses the mnemonic ABCDE, which stands for <em>A</em>irway, <em>B</em>reathing, <em>C</em>irculation, <em>D</em>isability, and <em>E</em>xposure</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">rhabdomyolysis:</span> a toxic syndrome caused by widespread injury to skeletal muscle, resulting in myoglobinuria and acute kidney injury</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">secondary survey:</span> an assessment of the patient triaged to the emergent or resuscitation category that commences after the primary survey is completed and life-threatening insults addressed; includes obtaining vital signs, completing a head-to-toe examination, and obtaining the patient&#x2019;s pertinent medical-surgical history, including the history of the current event</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">sentinel event:</span> an unanticipated event that results in patient harm</p>
<p class="glossary_hang_text"><span class="number_ol0">triage:</span> process of assessing patients to determine management priorities</p>
</div>
<div class="bBottom"></div>
<div class="pagebreak_container"><span class="pagebreak">p. 2179</span><div class="rule"></div><span id="page2180" class="pagebreak" epub:type="pagebreak" title="2180">p. 2180</span></div>
<p class="nonindent">The term <em>emergency management</em> traditionally refers to care given to patients with urgent and critical needs. However, because many people lack access to health care, the emergency department (ED) is used frequently for nonurgent problems. Therefore, the philosophy of emergency management has broadened to include the concept that an emergency is whatever the patient or the family considers it to be.</p>
<p class="indent">The emergency nurse has had specialized education, training, and expertise in assessing and identifying patients&#x2019; health problems in crisis situations. In addition, the emergency nurse establishes priorities, monitors, and continuously assesses patients who are acutely ill and injured, supports and attends to families, supervises allied health personnel, and educates patients and families within a time-limited, high-pressured care environment. Nursing interventions are accomplished interdependently, in consultation with or under the direction of a physician or advanced practitioner such as a nurse practitioner or physician assistant. The roles of nursing and medicine are complementary in an emergency situation. Appropriate nursing and medical interventions are anticipated based on assessment data. Members of the ED staff work as a team in performing the highly technical, hands-on skills required to care for patients in emergency situations (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">People seek emergency care for serious life-threatening conditions, such as cardiac arrhythmias, acute coronary syndrome, acute heart failure, pulmonary edema, and stroke. Priorities for managing these cardiac and other conditions are discussed in <a href="c22.xhtml">Chapters 22</a>, <a href="c23.xhtml">23</a>, <a href="c25.xhtml">25</a>, and <a href="c62.xhtml">62</a>. Emergency management of trauma and conditions not found elsewhere in this book are discussed in this chapter. Facts about ED visits in the United States are presented in <a href="#ct67-1">Chart 67-1</a>.</p>
<div class="box1a">
<p class="BoxpNumber" id="ct67-1"><strong>Chart 67-1</strong></p></div>
<div class="box1">
<p class="Box8pTitle"><strong><strong>Facts About Emergency Department Visits&#x2014;2017</strong></strong></p>
<p class="BoxpPARA">In 2017, there were 139 million visits to emergency departments (EDs); 40 million were as a result of an injury. Additional relevant statistics included the following:</p>
<p class="BoxBL1First"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The most common reasons for ED visits were abdominal pain, chest pain, cough, and fever.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Most patients had health insurance, with only 16% of patients without insurance.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Approximately 14.5% of patients arrived at the ED by ambulance.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>14.5 million visits resulted in admission; of these, 2 million required admission to an intensive care unit (ICU).</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Injuries and poisonings accounted for 18.9% of all ED visits.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Middle"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>The leading causes of injuries were unintentional, totaling 68.2% of injury admissions, with falls and motor vehicle collisions making up 32% of these.</p>
<p class="BoxBL1Last"><span class="bull1a">&#x2022;</span>Nearly 40% of patients were seen by a provider in less than 15 minutes after arrival to the ED.</p>
<p class="BoxpCreditsListPara">Adapted from Rui, P., &#x0026; Kang, K. (2017). National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2017 emergency department summary tables. National Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved on 4/20/2020 at: <a href="http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhamcs/web_tables/2017_ed_web_tables-508.pdf">www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhamcs/web_tables/2017_ed_web_tables-508.pdf</a></p>
</div>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>