<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3287">Natural Disasters</h4>
<p class="nonindent">Natural disasters may result in mass casualties. Natural disasters can occur anywhere at any time and include events such as tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, avalanches, tidal waves (e.g., tsunamis), earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions (see <a href="#tt68-3">Table 68-3</a>). In the event of a natural disaster, loss of communications, potable water, and electricity is usually the greatest obstacle to a well-coordinated emergency response, and preparatory planning is essential. Wireless technology (e.g., cellular phones, computers, other communication devices) may not be functional (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">The majority of the immediate casualties are trauma related. These mass casualties require the trauma system to provide triage, transport of patients (in poor weather and road conditions), and management within the trauma centers. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2230" title="2230"></span>Most patients usually begin arriving within an hour of the event. However, the &#x201C;walking wounded&#x201D; may not seek care for 5 days to 2 weeks after the event or may seek care for injuries received during cleanup activities. Casualties arrive at hospitals in three waves. The first wave consists of people who are minimally (generally) injured who arrive of their own accord. The second wave consists of patients who are severely injured. The third wave consists of patients who are injured and who arrive after they are discovered by rescuers. For example, in the event of earthquakes, rescuers may find injured patients in collapsed buildings; the majority of fatalities from injuries in this case primarily involve the head and chest (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Veenema, 2019</a>).</p>
<div class="table">
<table class="tbo" id="tt68-3">
<colgroup>
<col style="width:20%"></col>
<col style="width:80%"></col>
</colgroup>
<tr>
<td class="tdnum"><p class="tnum"><strong>TABLE&#x00A0;68-3</strong></p></td>
<td><p class="tcaption">Select Natural Disasters</p></td>
</tr>
</table>
<table class="table">
<tr><td class="thead"><p class="T2">Event</p></td>
<td class="thead"><p class="T2">Issues and Injuries</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Earthquakes</p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Associated with multiple aftershocks, tsunamis</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Buildings require tethering in earthquake-prone areas</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> Physical injury; dehydration; pulmonary problems</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Flooding</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Can accompany other natural disasters</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Results in home and community destruction</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> Nonfatal drowning/drowning (e.g., people swept away in currents); waterborne and vector-borne diseases (e.g., shigellosis, <em>Escherichia coli</em> infection, hepatitis A, giardiasis, leptospirosis, malaria, plague, dengue fever); physical injury from debris</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hurricanes</p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Cause flooding (see previous discussion) and tornadoes (see later discussion)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Failure to evacuate</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Food and water safety</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> From recovery activities (e.g., chainsaws), stress-related disorders, and GI and other vector-borne diseases; physical injury; bites from traumatized pets</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Tornadoes</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Minimal warning, fast moving (approximately 30 mph and travel approximately 20 km)</p>
<p class="tbodyleft">Massive destruction, shelter loss</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> Physical injury; blastlike effects from pressure (see discussion of blast injuries in text)</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Tsunamis</p></td>
<td class="td1_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">As with flooding (see above) but with much more rapid onset resulting in immediate large volume of water on land</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> Physical injury from debris; vector-borne diseases (see the Flooding section); cholera</p></td></tr>
<tr><td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Volcanic eruptions</p></td>
<td class="td2_line">
<p class="tbodyleft">Hazards from lava, openings in ground, gases, ash up to a 20-mile radius</p>
<p class="tbodyleft"><em>Injuries:</em> Acid rain; toxic gases result in inhalation injury; physical injury</p></td></tr>
</table>
<p class="tablesource">GI, gastrointestinal.</p>
<p class="tablesource">Adapted from Veenema, T. G. (2019). <em>Disaster nursing and emergency preparedness</em> (4th ed.). New York: Springer.</p>
</div>
<p class="indent">Excessive exposure to the natural elements and the need for food and water (by both patients and emergency responders) are critical issues. Without cover (e.g., buildings may be unsafe or destroyed) or potable water (e.g., water may be either contaminated or unavailable), injuries from exposure to heat, cold, or contaminated food or water can occur. Safety equipment that protects rescue workers from injury, exposure, and potentially dangerous animals (e.g., snakes, alligators, spiders) must be readily available. Rescue workers may also injure themselves in the process of extrication or cleanup (e.g., chain saws, building collapse). Hypothermia can occur rapidly in workers who are exposed to water at temperatures of 23.9&#x00B0;C (75&#x00B0;F) or less. As is true during all disasters, mental health workers and shelters are needed throughout the community. Veterinary assistance is also essential because pets are frequently abandoned and injured. In addition, emergency response workers must be prepared to treat the most common ailments experienced after exposure to a specific natural disaster. For instance, pulmonary problems peak with earthquakes and volcanic eruptions because of the increased particulate matter in the air (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Veenema, 2019</a>).</p>
<p class="indent">In some instances, early warning systems have assisted in decreasing the number of deaths from tornadoes and hurricanes. Even with the advent of early warning systems, some people are unable or unwilling to leave prior to the occurrence of the natural disaster.</p>
<p class="indent">When buildings collapse, rapid response to identify and remove trapped victims is the only means of improving survivability. Water-damaged buildings are not safe and require extensive examination before experts can ensure safe occupancy. Larger-scale issues that can cause significant later morbidity and mortality include the absence of water purification, waste removal, removal of human and animal remains, and vector control. Removal or disposal of biologic, chemical, and nuclear agents must also be considered (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Tintinalli et al., 2020</a>).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>