<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/>
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div id="main_container">
<section epub:type="division">
<h4 class="h4" id="s3288">Outbreaks, Epidemics, and Pandemics</h4>
<p class="nonindent">An <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;outbreak:&lt;/b&gt; the occurrence of a disease within a population that exceeds normal expectations">outbreak</button></strong> is the occurrence of a disease within a population that exceeds normal expectations. Outbreaks can be classified as communicable disease outbreaks, outbreaks caused by exposure to chemicals or toxins, and outbreaks from unknown sources. An outbreak may be transmitted via persons, animals, or from the environment (WHO, 2020b).</p>
<p class="indent">An <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;epidemic:&lt;/b&gt; a widespread outbreak of a specific infectious disease from a single source within a community or population that exceeds anticipated levels of impact">epidemic</button></strong> is a widespread outbreak of a specific infectious disease from a single source within a community or population that exceeds anticipated levels of impact. An epidemic exists when new cases exceed the expected incidence of that disease. The rate and transmission of the infectious disease is dependent on multiple factors which include preexisting levels of the disease in the community, environmental changes that occurred as a result of the disease, population density and displacement, disruption of utilities, interruption of health services, and public sanitation. In order for a true epidemic to occur, there must be a vulnerable population, the presence of a disease agent, and a mechanism that supports large-scale transmission (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Veenema, 2019</a>). During an epidemic, there is a need to respond quickly and intentionally as catastrophic loss of human life and economic devastation may occur. Epidemics may be deemed an emergency if any of the following characteristics are present (<a href="c68-sec07.xhtml#bib4754">Veenema, 2019</a>):</p>
<ul class="bull"><li><span>Large number of cases projected to occur</span></li>
<li><span>Disease leads to serious disability or death</span></li>
<li><span>Disease threatens to cause social or economic disruption</span></li>
<li><span>Officials are unable to manage resources adequately due to the surge in cases. This includes sufficient number of trained personnel, necessary supplies and equipment (e.g., vaccines, medications, testing equipment, etc.)</span></li>
<li><span>Risk to transmit the disease internationally</span></li></ul>
<p class="indent">A <strong><button class="vsm-bubble-widget glossary-term" data-bubble-content="&lt;b&gt;pandemic:&lt;/b&gt; an epidemic that spreads across multiple countries or continents">pandemic</button></strong> is an epidemic that spreads across multiple countries or continents. There are many more individuals affected and greater number of deaths associated with pandemics than epidemics. In March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic (WHO, 2020a).</p>
<p class="indent">Communicable disease outbreaks, which may eventually lead to epidemics or pandemics, are investigated through public health surveillance and the monitoring of clusters of illnesses. Interviews, questionnaires, and home visits may be beneficial when people are experiencing the same symptoms of illness (CDC, 2018b). It is imperative to identify the source of the illness and institute measures for the containment of the outbreak. An outbreak is over when the numbers of new cases fall below the number of normally expected cases (CDC, 2018b).</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>