<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="default-style" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Brunner &#38; Suddarth&#8217;s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing, 15e</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<section epub:type="copyright-page" title="Copyright Page">
<div id="main_container">
<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageiv" title="iv"></span>
<p class="copy"><em>Vice President, Nursing Segment:</em> Julie K. Stegman</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Director, Nursing Education and Practice Content:</em> Jamie Blum</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Senior Acquisitions Editor:</em> Jonathan Joyce</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Senior Development Editor:</em> Meredith L. Brittain</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Freelance Development Editor:</em> Rose G. Foltz</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Senior Editorial Coordinator:</em> Julie Kostelnik</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Marketing Manager</em>: Brittany Clements</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Editorial Assistant:</em> Molly Kennedy</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Senior Production Project Manager:</em> David Saltzberg</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Manager, Graphic Arts and Design:</em> Steve Druding</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Art Director:</em> Jennifer Clements</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Manufacturing Coordinator:</em> Margie Orzech</p>
<p class="copy"><em>Prepress Vendor:</em> Aptara, Inc.</p>
<p class="copy1">15th Edition</p>
<p class="copy1">Copyright &#x00A9; 2022 Wolters Kluwer</p>
<p class="copy1">Copyright &#x00A9; 2018 Wolters Kluwer. Copyright &#x00A9; 2014, 2010 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins. Copyright &#x00A9; 2008 by Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer business. Copyright &#x00A9; 2004, 2000 by Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins. Copyright &#x00A9; 1996 by Lippincott-Raven Publishers. Copyright &#x00A9; 1992, 1988, 1984, 1980, 1975, 1970, 1964 by J. B. Lippincott Company. All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, including as photocopies or scanned-in or other electronic copies, or utilized by any information storage and retrieval system without written permission from the copyright owner, except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Materials appearing in this book prepared by individuals as part of their official duties as U.S. government employees are not covered by the above-mentioned copyright. To request permission, please contact Lippincott Williams &#x0026; Wilkins at Two Commerce Square, 2001 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103, via email at <a href="mailto:permissions@lww.com">permissions@lww.com</a>, or via our website at <a href="http://lww.com">lww.com</a> (products and services).</p>
<p class="copy1">Nursing diagnoses in this title are ICNP&#x00AE; nursing diagnoses. ICNP&#x00AE; is owned and copyrighted by the International Council of Nurses (ICN). Reproduced with permission of the copyright holder.</p>
<p class="copy1">9&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;8&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;7&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;6&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;5&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;4&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;3&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;2&#x00A0;&#x00A0;&#x00A0;1</p>
<p class="copy1">Printed in China</p>
<p class="ucopy2">978-1-9751-6103-3</p>
<p class="copy">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon request</p>
<p class="ucopy3">Library of Congress Control Number: 2021911700</p>
<p class="copy1">This work is provided &#x201C;as is,&#x201D; and the publisher disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, including any warranties as to accuracy, comprehensiveness, or currency of the content of this work.</p>
<p class="copy1">This work is no substitute for individual patient assessment based upon healthcare professionals&#x2019; examination of each patient and consideration of, among other things, age, weight, gender, current or prior medical conditions, medication history, laboratory data and other factors unique to the patient. The publisher does not provide medical advice or guidance and this work is merely a reference tool. Healthcare professionals, and not the publisher, are solely responsible for the use of this work including all medical judgments and for any resulting diagnosis and treatments.</p>
<p class="copy1">Given continuous, rapid advances in medical science and health information, independent professional verification of medical diagnoses, indications, appropriate pharmaceutical selections and dosages, and treatment options should be made and healthcare professionals should consult a variety of sources. When prescribing medication, healthcare professionals are advised to consult the product information sheet (the manufacturer&#x2019;s package insert) accompanying each drug to verify, among other things, conditions of use, warnings and side effects and identify any changes in dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the medication to be administered is new, infrequently used or has a narrow therapeutic range. To the maximum extent permitted under applicable law, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property, as a matter of products liability, negligence law or otherwise, or from any reference to or use by any person of this work.</p>
<p class="copyc"><a href="http://shop.lww.com">shop.lww.com</a></p>
</div>
</section>
</body>
</html>